Introduction
As an online social media tool, the microblog has experienced rapid development in recent times. Microblogs allow users to broadcast messages and share feelings and information at any time, and these messages are automatically pushed to friends' homepages, forming the automatic propagation mechanism. The microblog has become a concentrated expression and reflection of public opinion on the Internet, which largely affects public opinion in general [1]. Although the spread range of messages in daily life is small, the development of social networks has amplified it greatly. For example, public opinion originating on social networks spreads quickly and easily due to diverse information, powerful interactivity and other advantages that traditional media cannot match; however, fuzzy and false information can also appear on social media. Harmful information can be propagated across regions and borders through open-ended communication, particularly reactionary rhetoric attacking social stability. Thus, source tracing research is necessary to quell rumors. The current study focuses on topic detection and tracking. Source tracing research is limited. Information propagated through microblogging spreads quickly, reaching larger audiences and exerting a wider influence than information disseminated through other channels, rendering it difficult to trace. Source tracing and the identification of events and key figures in microblog propagation has become a significant problem in need of a solution. Therefore, quantifying the participation degree of users, confirming the topic source and extracting key persons are the key foci of this paper.
Source tracing includes mining the true initiator and early important participants because some users simply repost or directly copy other's blog messages, with the result that the early participants are sometimes more important than the initiators. To determine these important nodes, this paper presents the ITEPE source tracing algorithm. The forwarded cascades (session tree) are built and the cascade sets (session forest) are then clustered according to topic relevance. Second, the real initiators are determined through a combination of user networks and information cascade networks. The influence index and conformity index of every node are then iteratively calculated according to text sentiment analysis and information cascades and the early important participants are extracted. The real initiators and early participants will be obtained and evaluated through an experiment. Compared to previous studies, the ITEPE algorithm has the ability to trace back to the information source through microblog retweeting cascades. Related research has not been identified.
There have been recent several studies on the social network information diffusion model, and multiple algorithms extract social networks from a group of the most influential nodes. The basic idea is that these nodes will disseminate information more widely, including information dissemination predicted by analyzing the blog information cascade [2], [3]. According to Dabeer [4], who analyzed the factors affecting microblog information dissemination, including information characteristics and the activity, response and out-degree of fan nodes, the information dissemination speed of microblogs is faster than that of traditional blogs and their propagation models differ. Dabeer further proposed a decision making framework based on Markov to measure the effectiveness of information dissemination. Lehmann [5] tracked the hashtag diffusion process in the Twitter network and discovered that epidemic spread models play an important role. Yang [6] predicted the speed, size and scope of microblog information dissemination, and Tsur [7] combined content and network topology by using linear regression to predict the diffusion of information within a given timeframe.
This paper differs from the existing studies in two ways. First, most of the existing algorithms extract and sort the high-influence nodes but do not consider topic relevancy. Yang [8] presented a linear influence model using microblog network relationships to predict the diffusion path and provide the global diffusion capacity of each node. The number of studies focusing on the information source remains relatively small. Recent studies show that the dissemination of information does not depend on the most influential person but on the mutual influence among those likely to be affected [9]. An important conclusion of the study is that early important participants are more influential than the message initiator in the information dissemination cascade. Our research will focus on the traceability research of the microblog information spread cascade, including the true information initiator and early important participants. Second, the topic-based emotion subgraph is proposed to analyze the influence and conformity index in cascade sets to mine the key person.
Retweets from microblogs are the main data mining objects because retweets are the basis of information dissemination, influence analysis, sentiment analysis, topic discovery and evolution, and so on. Therefore, the study of microblog retweeting helps us understand the information diffusion mechanism. Macskassy [10] showed that the majority of users do not necessarily retweet familiar topics. Yang [11] studied the Twitter retweeting mechanism with results indicating that approximately 1/4 of published microblog tweets are retweets of friends' posts. Welch [12] studied the semantic information of the follow and retweeting relationship and found that the latter has stronger topical relevance. Pal and Counts [13] assessed and sorted users' authority using the number of original tweets, participants in the session and retweeting as a primary index; their model used a large calculation quantity Gaussian mixture model to calculate the user influence, which is not suitable for traceability research. Meanwhile, the user influence assessment based on information must address many different languages, dialects, pictures and videos, and so on. Therefore, we must use a simple method to gather accurate information such that only the cascade and the topology are used to study traceability without semantic mining, and only positive and negative emotions are used to assess influence while ignoring the impact of information in different formats.
The influence of microblogs can be understood as a user being affected by other users in such a way as to change his or her behavior. There are two separate approaches to key person extraction in social networks: the approach based on context roles and that based on social network structures. The most common key person extraction methods rely on various centrality measures for each node separately. These algorithms, however, lack a holistic view, and the node position in a social community is determined by its neighborhoods, such as degree prestige and degree centrality. There are also global algorithms, such as proximity prestige, rank prestige, node position, eccentricity and closeness centrality. Many studies have examined various domains (influence spread, public opinion analysis and terrorist group analysis) in this area [14]–[17]. Most existing influence analysis algorithms are improved using traditional algorithms. Cha et al. used indegree, retweets and mentions to measure individual influence on Twitter. Additionally, influence can be measured by diffusion ability, as in Bakshy [19], who used Twitter data URL structures to build the cascade propagation tree and measured node influence on its diffusion range. Steeg [20] suggested a measure of causal relationships between nodes based on the information-theoretic notion of transfer entropy, or information transfer. Most of these methods, however, only consider node influence and ignore the conformity assessment. The purpose of social network traceability is to find the information source. Thus, the information initiators and early important nodes are the main mining objects. However, the existing algorithms cannot meet this demand, so we use the topic-based cascade and users' topologies to confirm the information source by calculating the influence index and conformity index. The result sets include true information initiators and early participants.
