Introduction
Infectious diseases remain a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in developing countries. Over one billion people, mostly in rural areas, are currently afflicted with one or more communicable diseases.[1]–[5] Many of these maladies are preventable with access to safe water, sanitation, and healthcare.[6] However, identification of people that are ill is a strenuous task in rural poor areas where access to formal medical care is scarce and infectious diseases are chronic.[7] Furthermore, behavioural modification to improve preventative health, such as the persuasion of households to use protected instead of open water sources and to use pit latrines instead of engaging in open defecation, proves challenging in practice.[8] Monitoring such behaviours is difficult, in particular for open defecation, as many of these behaviours are conducted in private. Therefore, indirect indicators, such as social popularity and influence, may offer a useful alternative to identify who is ill and whom to target for behavioural health interventions [9].
Social networks have been widely studied for understanding peer effects and the spread of behaviours in a variety of contexts.[10]–[15] The study of complex networks aims to provide insight into the connectivity of physical, natural, or social systems.[16] Two commonly examined network properties are degree and betweenness. The degree of an individual, or node, is the number of incoming and outgoing connections. Of primary focus for social networks is in-degree, the number of incoming connections.[17] In-degree conveys the popularity of individuals, by counting the number of people that have named that person as a friend. Betweenness is the proportion of shortest paths (here, a set of lines connecting two households) in a network that traverses the node of interest.[17] In contrast to in-degree, betweenness is a global measure of the network. High betweenness commonly is viewed as an indicator of information spreading in social networks.[18] However, it is an open question as to what extent betweenness and in-degree are important factors in determining self-reported physical health and actual health behaviours. These centrality indicators are particularly important in distinguishing how social placement affects health, as households that traverse the most paths connecting other households (high betweenness) need not have many friends (high in-degree) [19].
Existing studies [20]–[23] on social networks and health identified the dependencies between dyads of people in single non-interacting networks and showed that individuals were connected with other individuals of similar physical health. For example, Christakis et al. [22] and Liljeros et al. [23] found that high degree nodes were more likely to be sick or infected than low degree nodes. We expand upon this literature and study a set of remote villages in rural Liberia. Liberia is recovering from a civil war, which resulted in high levels of mortality and morbidity and broke down the delivery of basic health services. While important steps have been taken to rebuild the country, Liberia still ranks amongst the lowest in the world with respect to health indicators. Under-five mortality is 110 out of every 1000, the childhood malaria rate is 32%, reduced growth in children (stunting) is 42%, and access to formal health services is below 40% in remote areas.[24] We demonstrate the ability of social network indicators to predict health outcomes and to explain the susceptibility of a household to partake in health interventions in one of the most impoverished and under-researched developing country contexts. Especially, we find that in-degree predicts household physical health status and betweenness identifies individuals susceptible to positive behavioural influence and likely to respond to health interventions.
