Introduction
Ecological network models and analyses are recognized for their value in articulating the quantitative and conceptual relationships and emergent properties of natural ecosystems, for generating plausible explanations and testable hypotheses pertaining to community structure and dynamics [1]–[3] and predictions regarding their responses to natural and anthropogenic perturbations [4], [5]. Their importance for informing management and policies has increased markedly with the advent of ecosystem-based management (EBM) approaches (e.g., [6]). EBM requires knowledge of how the human uses of ecosystem services influence the structural (e.g., diversity, composition) and functional (e.g., productivity, nutrient cycling) attributes of ecosystems and how these attributes underpin their integrity and resilience. Quantitative ecosystem models based on species or functional group interaction networks are key tools for understanding how human activities influence ecosystems. These models allow users to forecast how entire ecosystems may respond to alternative management actions. For example, models of species interactions that describe ecosystem-wide effects of anthropogenic perturbations have proven particularly insightful for informing ecosystem-based fisheries management [7], and for understanding the effects of seasonal forcing in freshwater ecosystems [8] and carbon flux in terrestrial forests [9].
However, a critical barrier to the successful implementation of ecosystem-based models is the accessibility of the substantial data they require [10], [11]. An ideal source for this data would be verifiable, comprehensive, relevant, well organized, thoroughly explained, easily updated and readily available at a single location online. Though there is a clear need for accessible online databases tailored for the development of ecological network models, few if any databases meet these criteria. Here, we describe an online interactive database with information (life history, demography, species interactions) required of many ecological network models and that fulfills these and other necessary criteria for expediting the development of these models.

Why ecological network models need databases
In a comprehensive review of ecological network models used to characterize and explore marine ecosystems, Plagányi [12] identified four general categories of models: Minimum Realistic, Individual Based, Biogeochemical, and Aggregate System Models (Table 1). These four broad categories of ecological network models illustrate the diversity of information that is required of, or can be accommodated by, the various ecological network models. Other model types, such as qualitative loop analysis [13], [14] and allometric trophic network models [8] also benefit from such information. Despite differences in their assumptions and focal applications, all of these modeling approaches accommodate or require some of the same forms of information, such as knowledge of what species, life-stages or functional groups constitute an ecosystem. However, they differ in their requirements or ability to accommodate other forms of information including species' currencies (e.g., biomass, density), distributions, life history or demographic attributes, and the manner in which species interact (e.g., predation, parasitism, competition, mutualism; Table 1). For example, many ecological network models focus entirely on trophic interactions in their representation of species interactions, ignoring non-trophic interactions, such as competition for space [15] or parasitism [16]. The greater the variety of information included in a database, the greater its application across the diversity of ecological network models. Much of the same types of information are also relevant to the development of single-species population models, and are useful in non-modeling contexts. For example, including knowledge of the geographic patterns of species' life history traits and interspecific interactions can help to inform the design of experimental and observational studies, or the placement of marine reserves [17]–[19].

Shortcomings of existing online databases for ecological network modeling
The diversity of information required by the various kinds of ecological network models is rarely organized in a form that is useful or accessible to modelers. Several well-designed online taxon-specific databases exist that collate information on species taxonomy, phylogeny, life history traits and distribution (Table 2). However, few of these mediate with web browsers or between multiple databases, instead referring to static species-focused summaries. Fewer still translate data requests beyond species-specific searches to permit the querying of multiple species from a common functional group. Having no online database management system (DBMS), these databases preclude the integration of different functions and information in the same process to permit simultaneous access of taxonomic, life history, distribution and ecological databases [20]. Some database management systems (e.g. FishBase, Sea Life Base; Table 2) have the potential to integrate multiple databases in their queries but do not currently do so. Furthermore, database entries do not reference their datum-specific sources, leaving attribution absent or too general and difficult to reconstruct and thereby making validation and reanalysis difficult or impossible.

More generally, few existing databases housing information relevant to ecological network models also include information on species interactions. Those that do, include only the presence of the interactions without source citations or detailed description of their nature, spatial, or temporal patterns specific to those interactions. Hence, variation and uncertainties in interaction information are difficult to obtain and remain challenging to incorporate into ecological network models.

Ecological network models for kelp forest ecosystems
Kelp forests are stands of large macroalgae of the Order Laminariales that occur on temperate and boreal rocky reefs around the world and are among the most productive and diverse ecosystems in the world (reviewed by [21]–[23]). These species-rich ecosystems provide many ecosystem functions, including primary production, habitat for fishes, invertebrates, mammals, and birds, and nurseries for a diversity of species (reviewed by [24]–[27]). Kelp forests also provide humans with many services, including carbon sequestration, shoreline protection and non-consumptive recreational activities [27], [28]. In particular, they support economically and culturally significant commercial and recreational fisheries (e.g., [29], [30]).
Species interactions are known to be key determinants of the structure and dynamics of kelp forests around the word such as the west coast of the United States [22], [24], [27], [31], North Atlantic [32], [33], Mexico [34], Australia and Tasmania [35] yet these are sensitive to anthropogenic and natural perturbations [35]–[37]. Given the importance and complexity of their species interactions, kelp forest ecosystems are strong candidates for ecosystem-based management, which greatly benefits from the use of ecological network models [26].
Only recently, a number of ecological network models have been generated for kelp forests including Espinosa-Romero [38], Ortiz [39], Brynes et al. [40] and Marzloff et al. [41], for the west coast of Canada, northern Chile, and southern California, respectively. In addition, theoretical multi-species models (not parameterized empirically), have enhanced our understanding of complex interactions in kelp forest systems [42], [43] and assemblages of sessile invertebrates on temperate rocky reefs [44]. Each of these models represents local species composition and, justifiably, over-simplify the networks of kelp forest species interactions. Model-simplification can reflect a compromise between computational power, model-sensitivity, user interests, and preconceptions, but in many cases is simply a result of a lack of accessible information about life history traits and species interactions.
In the process of our development of ecological network models for the kelp forests of the eastern Pacific we found the necessary life history, demographic, and species interaction information poorly synthesized and organized and difficult to access. For these reasons, we developed an online database to collate and freely disseminate information on species life histories, demography, and species interactions. Here, we describe the development of and rationale for the database structure, and the means of accessing the information. Our goal here is to facilitate its use and describe its potential implementation for other ecosystems. That is, although the database was constructed with a focus on kelp forests, the interface, structure, utilities and functions could be easily translated for use in any other ecosystem. Moreover, because the architecture of this database is a DBMS, it can be integrated into a more comprehensive database integrating multiple ecosystems.
