Introduction
The network paradigm helps modeling the multiscale character of biological systems: “networks” is the generic name for graphs, which represent a set of nodes linked by edges. Complex systems are, thus, easily represented by graphs, whose nodes are the system elements and edges represent the relation between them.
The network structure allows for a natural combination of different scales: each node inherits its role in the system by its location in the network (top-down causation), while the global properties of the whole network depend upon the edges (bottom-up causation).
Biological networks (e.g., protein-protein interaction networks, protein contact maps, gene expression networks, ) very often display a scale-free architecture lying halfway between random networks, whose wiring is assigned according to a Gaussian distribution of link probability, and regular networks, whose nodes all show the same degree (number of edges pertaining to a single node). One of the most challenging tasks for biological scale-free networks analysis is to assign a functional role to each node depending on its location in the network.
In their innovative work, Han et al. [1] estimated the dynamics of hubs (high-degree nodes) from the analysis of messenger RNA expression profiles. The authors examined how much hubs in the yeast interactome are co-expressed with their interaction partners, computing the average Pearson correlation coefficient (APCC) between the hub mRNA expression and its nearest neighbors. They found APCC distribution follows a bimodal distribution singling out two distinct hub populations: they called “party hubs” those nodes that are highly correlated in expression with their partners (high APCC) and “date hubs” those showing more limited co-expression with their own partners (lower APCC). This distinction matches with permanent (party hubs) and transient interactions (date hubs) [1]. Eventually, the authors showed that a link exists between this hub classification and the network tolerance against node breakdown: scale-free networks are particularly resilient to random node removal (failure), albeit extremely sensitive to the targeted removal of hubs (attack) [2], [3].
The work by Han et al. [1] is just one out of many applications of network approach in the biology and biotechnology realm (see [4] for a comprehensive review). The by far most part of the network applications deals with the mesoscopic properties of the graphs representing a link between structural and functional properties of systems.
In their seminal work [5], Guimerà and Amaral developed a methodology for the multiscale network analysis passing by the network module identification (network clustering): they classified nodes according to their inter and intra-module connectivity, by identifying two descriptors, the participation coefficient P and the within-module z-score z, for the inter and intra-module connectivity, respectively. This method has been largely applied in many different fields, from metabolic networks [5] to brain functionality [6], [7], passing by non biological application [8]. The analysis of  space shows peculiar features when derived for protein contact networks [9]–[12], providing a meaningful functional characterization of local and global network properties.
Here we propose a Cytoscape plugin, GIANT (GuImerà Amaral NeTwork) implementing our modified interpretation of the Guimerà and Amaral cartography. This plugin identifies modules in a network by three different clustering methods: spectral, k-means and MCL (Markov CLuster) algorithm. The proposed approach fits with any clustering algorithm, such as those implemented in clusterMaker [13]. The output is the network cartography in the  plane, highlighting nodes role according to our modified Guimerà and Amaral classification.
We show the application to two case studies of biological relevance: the protein contact network of hemoglobin and the co-expression network of Vitis Vinifera. The color map superimposed to the Cytoscape network view shows a clear relation between the nodes role and their  description.
