Introduction
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive primary brain tumor that exhibits extremely poor response to current therapies. Despite maximal therapy with surgical resection, radiation and temozolomide, survival statistics remain dismal [1], [2]. According to the National Brain Tumor Society, GBM accounts for approximately 23 percent of all primary brain tumors diagnosed in the U.S. The prognosis for survival beyond the five-year mark is poor, and the average survivability for people diagnosed with GBM is one year [3]. Early diagnosis and treatment however often extend the quality and length of life for individuals suffering with GBM. Early detection of high-grade malignancy also significantly increases the treatment options available and patient survival rate [4]. Several studies have attempted to identify potential biomarkers for GBM. In a study of 125 GBM patients, MGMT promoter methylation was strongly correlated to GBM survival [5]. In addition to EGFR amplification, maintenance of PTEN, wild-type p53 and p16 has also been associated with improved survival in GBM following chemotherapy [6]. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 10q23 in primary GBMs and TP53 mutations in secondary GBMs has also been well documented in patient studies [7]. Studies using microRNA (miRNA) arrays and glioma tissues found that miR-27a was up-regulated in the glioma cell lines and patients samples by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and suggest that miR-27a may be implicated in the progression of glioma through the modulation of neurotrophin signaling pathway, the MAPK signaling pathway, the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, the p53 signaling pathway, the apoptotic signaling pathway, as well as others [8]. The stable expression of a targeting construct against miR-27, an anti-miR-27 construct, significantly reduced the proliferation and the accumulation of U87 GBM cells and impaired the invasiveness of U87 GBM cells in vitro [9]. However, the prognostic value of these biomarkers has yet to be ascertained and further progress needs to be made not only to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the role of these biomarkers in GBM cancer progression but also to identify others.
MiRNAs are single-stranded short coding RNA molecules of approximately 22 nucleotides in length. MiRNAs guide the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to post-transcriptionally repress the expression of protein-coding genes by binding to targeted messenger RNAs (mRNAs). MiRNAs constitute only 1–3% of the human genome, yet are estimated to control approximately one third of all gene expression. A single miRNA has been observed to control over 100 target mRNAs [10]. Conversely, a single mRNA can be modulated by multiple miRNAs. Over 1,000 miRNAs have been identified in humans according to a registry (miRBase) cataloguing all reported discoveries. MiRNAs play crucial regulatory roles in several cellular processes, including growth, proliferation, metabolism, development, and apoptosis [11], [12]. Given miRNAs widespread regulatory function within the cell, the aberrant expression of miRNAs has naturally been implicated in several human diseases, such as diabetes, arthritis, kidney disease, neurodegenerative disorders and cancer [13]. Studies of genome-wide miRNA expression have indicated that a majority of human miRNA genes are located at fragile genomic sites associated with cancer, and that miRNAs can function both as an oncogene and as a tumor suppressor. However, understanding how miRNA dynamics differ between phenotypic states on a systems level has remained an enigma, particularly in understanding how global modulations of miRNAs can program a non-cancer state to exhibit cancer-phenotypic characteristics. Currently there exist several computational miRNA target prediction tools, which are heavily dependent on complementarily to miRNA seeds and evolutionary conservation. Although these features allow for successful target identification, not all miRNA target sites are conserved and adhere to canonical seed complementarity.
We applied an unbiased thermodynamic maximal-entropy based approach, known as surprisal analysis, to examine global miRNA expression dynamics of 534 miRNAs in over 490 GBM patients. This theoretical analysis unveils a GBM-specific miRNA thermodynamic signature capable of distinguishing healthy and GBM patients with high fidelity. Surprisal analysis also identified a miRNA system response unique to GBM patients, where miRNAs implicated in the regulation of stochastic signaling processes crucial in the hallmarks of human cancer, including cell proliferation and cancer metabolism, contributed the greatest free-energy to sustaining the GBM-cancer phenotypic state. We anticipate that the GBM-specific miRNA signature introduced here will have substantial translational potential and utility as a high-throughput drug discovery platform, particularly in better understanding how current therapeutics can affect biomolecule dynamics in human cancers.
