Introduction
Many people like to perform sports activities such as walking and running while listening to music. Recent studies indeed provide evidence that music can empower people, showing a strong effect on perceived exertion and performance boosts, especially when movements are synchronised with the musical beat, and when music has a motivating character [1]–[4]. However, many aspects of this phenomenon of musical empowerment have not been fully understood and further study is needed, especially in the light of interactive technologies and their applications.
In this paper we focus on the interactive technology, called D-Jogger, which allows for a mutual synchronisation of a person and a music player. With this interactive technology we wanted to explore how people entrain (i.e. adapt their synchronisation behaviour) to music players by controlling parameters such as the tempo and phase of the music played. We are interested in finding the optimal control parameters for inducing a spontaneous entrainment that would lead to a stable synchronisation between person and music player.
Up until quite recently, beat-synchronised walking or running was only possible when the person was explicitly instructed to adapt to the fixed beat played by the music player. It was shown in [5] that without instruction to synchonise, spontaneous gait synchronisation did not occur during treadmill walking. However, several studies show that instructed beat-synchronisation may encourage running and walking [1], [2], [6]–[12]. In some of these studies, the tempo of each song was fixed and a playlist was chosen in advance to match the person's tempo as close as possible to encourage the synchronisation.
With advances in technology, it is now possible to use a music player that automatically synchronises the tempo of the song to the gait frequency, or even synchronise each beat of the music to a footfall. D-Jogger [13] is a music player which, from a playlist of songs of differing tempi, is able to increase or decrease the speed or pulse of a song to match a listeners' walking or running pace. The tempi of the music will be in step with the progression of the person's movements, making incremental adjustments as the person advances. However, if the subject would suddenly change tempo; for example, from running to walking, such that the difference in tempo exceeds the range of adaptation of the initial tempo, then D-Jogger would select another song nearer to the person's new tempo. The tempo of the song can then adjust to match the person's tempo. Even more interesting, perhaps, is that the D-Jogger can also change the phase of a song so that it begins together with the footfall. The phase can also be adapted after a pause in motion. Several other devices, methods, and settings have been proposed, such as walking in synchrony with a robot [14], walking in synchrony with music in recreational settings [15]–[17], running with music in sport performance settings [6], [9], [10] and incorporating using music in rehabilitation training programs as rhythmical auditory stimuli (RAS) [18]–[21]. However, D-Jogger is rather unique in its real-time manipulation of phase. This makes the system very adaptive and interactive.
However, a major question deals with the type of adaptation and interaction that is made possible. What strategies induce spontaneous entrainment and stable synchronisation behaviour between a person and an adaptive music player? In addition, can these strategies be optimised?
Despite the fact that an expansive body of literature exists on sensorimotor synchronisation, there is a paucity of knowledge as regards the precise mechanisms that control the mutual adaptation of two interacting rhythms [22], [23]. Repp and Su [24] draw a useful distinction between different paradigms in adaptive (often interpersonal rather than person-machine) entrainment, chiefly the synchronisation-continuation paradigm, and the intentional and non-intentional entrainment. For example, in tapping studies that use the synchronisation-continuation paradigm, effects are observed whereby people mutually adjust their tapping, forming a unit of two-followers, rather than one or of them taking the lead, e.g. [25]. In intentional entrainment, the general observation is that the sensorimotor synchronisation of each person (and by extension of person and machine) relies on mutual temporal error-correction processes that involve continuous phase-correction adjustments. However, it is likely that human adjustment is also based on temporal assimilation, that is, adjustments involving higher-order periodicities implied in the signal [26]. This is especially relevant for music, which is characterised by accents and distributions of energy which promote the emergence of higher-order structures (i.e. metric levels, given beats as stimulus), (see also [4] for acoustical features, and [27] for a theoretical model of attending). In unintentional or spontaneous entrainment, studies often focus on sensorimotor synchronisation activities linked with walking or running. For example, unintentional tempo and phase-locking occurs in pairs of people walking side-by-side on different treadmills [28], or for interlimb coordination when only visual coupling is available [29]. However, between a person and a machine, a stable system in both phase and frequency of tapping was more easily formed when the virtual partner's adaptation rate was slow [30], [31]. Myake [14] also showed that two walking systems (one human and the other a robot) can adapt mutually, and that stable synchronisation can be achieved automatically on the basis of metronome cues. Modelling approaches [32], [33] show that spontaneous entrainment emerges from dynamical laws that operate via mediators on interactions, whereby entrainment is facilitated if certain conditions are fulfilled [34].
Based on the literature, we believe that there may exist an optimal strategy for inducing spontaneous entrainment and maintaining stable synchronisation between a walking/running person and adaptive music player. Our main hypothesis is that a fine-grained control of period and phase of the musical beat may have a great impact on the interaction and, thus, on the entrainment and alignment of the person-machine synchronisation. In the description below, we use the following terminology: entrainment - the dynamics that trigger the interaction (between a person and D-Jogger) to a stable synchronisation. Alignment - the sustained match between movement and music. An alignment strategy is an algorithm that adapts the period and/or phase of the music in response to the period and/or phase of a person's walking or running movement.
The purpose of this paper is to present an overview of the four alignment strategies that have been developed and evaluated in experiments with users, in order to optimise interaction with the D-Jogger. The four experiments vary in terms of the number of participants (10-119), environment (public exhibition versus laboratory, treadmill versus open air), instructions (experiment with treadmill system versus perception of environment during walking), and even mode of movement (walking vs. running vs. both). The experiments were run in sequence and after each experiment, there were indications that we could improve the alignment strategy for further enhancing spontaneous synchronisation. Finally, we settled upon four alignment strategies that differ in the fine details of the manipulation of the timing of the music player. As will be illustrated, interesting observations can be made about the strategies that control entrainment and alignment. Each strategy may be of interest, depending of the application one has in mind. Accordingly, the present paper systematises these explorations post hoc, based on the experimental data available, and draws some conclusions about the observations. In the next section ‘Methods’, we describe the basic components of the D-Jogger system and the methods selected for analysis. Then we present the results of four experiments and the associated four alignment strategies. This is followed by an overview of the results and a summary of the main findings. In the ‘Discussion’ chapter, we link these findings with theoretical perspectives and offer some observations on the limitations of our approach.
