Introduction
Many of the greatest contemporary technological developments have centered on advancing human communication. From the telegraph to the Internet, the primary utility of these game-changing innovations has been to increase the range of audiences that an individual can reach.
However, most current methods for communicating are still limited by the words and symbols available to the sender and understood by the receiver. Even when they include non-verbal content (as in the case of visual and auditory information), communication constraints can be severe. A great deal of the information that is available to our brain is not introspectively available to our consciousness, and thus cannot be voluntarily put in linguistic form. For instance, knowledge about one’s own fine motor control is completely opaque to the subject [1], and thus cannot be verbalized. As a consequence, a trained surgeon or a skilled violinist cannot simply “tell” a novice how to exactly position and move the fingers during the execution of critical hand movements. But even knowledge that is introspectively available can be difficult to verbalize. Brilliant teachers may struggle to express abstract scientific concepts in language [2], and everyone is familiar with the difficulty of putting one’s own feelings into words. Even when knowledge can be expressed in words, one might face the hurdle of translating between the many existing spoken human languages. Can information that is available in the brain be transferred directly in the form of the neural code, bypassing language altogether? We explore this idea in the rest of this article.
The idea of direct brain-to-brain communication could potentially be achieved using a Brain-to-Brain Interface (BBI) [3]–[5]. A BBI rests on two pillars: the capacity to read (or “decode”) useful information from neural activity and the capacity to write (or “encode”) digital information back into neural activity. In recent years, we have witnessed incredible progress in these two capabilities with the development of Brain-Computer Interfaces, or BCIs [6], [7]. BCI researchers have demonstrated the possibility of decoding motor [8], visual [9] and even conceptual information [10] from neural activity via a range of recording techniques such as implanted electrodes [8], electrocorticography (ECoG, e.g., [11]), electroencephalography (EEG, e.g., [12]), functional MRI (e.g., [13]), and magnetoencephalography (MEG, e.g., [14]). A variety of stimulation techniques also exist that permit users to encode digital information into neural activity using implanted electrodes [15], [16], transcranial magnetic stimulation, (TMS, [17]) and focused ultrasound (FUS, [18]). Prominent examples of BCIs that use stimulation include the cochlear implant [15] and deep brain stimulators [16].
Given these advances in BCIs, two recent efforts have addressed the question of whether direct brain-to-brain communication is possible with the technology we have today. Pais-Vieira and colleagues [3] explored the possibility of directly connecting the brains of two awake and behaving rats. In their experiment, cortical microelectrode arrays recorded the neural activity of “encoder” rats performing either a motor task or a tactile stimulation task, and guided the stimulation of motor and sensory areas in the brains of “decoder” rats. Because the actions of “decoder” rats mimicked those of the original “encoder” rats, the authors concluded that information had to have been transferred between their brains. An alternative BBI was proposed by Yoo and colleagues [5], who successfully demonstrated the transmission of information from a human brain to a rat brain. In this case, visual evoked potentials in the human brain were recorded with EEG and translated into FUS-based stimulation of the part of motor cortex that controlled the tail of the anesthetized rat.
Both of these BBIs rely on stimulation technologies that are either invasive or experimental in humans, and thus are currently confined to animal models. In this paper, we report results from the first non-invasive BBI that can be safely applied to humans. Specifically, we show that it is possible to use EEG to decode motor intentions from a “sender” brain, and TMS to deliver an equivalent motor command to the motor cortex of a “receiver” brain, allowing the receiver to perform the hand movement that was intended by the sender. To test the feasibility and applicability of this procedure, a task was designed that required cooperative information sharing between pairs of participants along the BBI. The rest of the article describes the BBI in detail and presents in-depth results from 6 human participants who played the role of either sender or receiver of information in the BBI. Results from the first demonstration of this BBI were announced in an online report in August 2013 [19].
