Introduction
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is one of the major causative agent of chronic hepatitis which leads to liver cirrhosis, hepato cellular carcinoma, and liver failure and the most significant cause for liver transplantation [1], [2]. It is estimated that about 3% of the world's population (∼180 million people) are affected with HCV [3] and 10 million people are believed to be infected by HCV alone in Pakistan [4]. HCV RNA genome encodes a single open reading frame that is translated into 3,000 amino acids (AA) poly protein and cleaved into 10 mature proteins. HCV genome translated into 4 structural (Core, E1 E2 and p7), and 6 important nonstructural (NS) proteins: NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B [5], which coordinate the intracellular processes of the viral life cycle. Among the NS proteins, NS3 is a multifunctional protein (1–631 AA) with serine protease activity at the N-terminal (1–180 AA) and a nucleoside-triphosphatase (NTPase) dependent RNA helicase activity (NS3 NTPase/helicase) at the C-terminal (181–631 AA) [6].
Among all HCV proteins, NS3/NS4A serine protease and helicase are effective drug targets to develop anti-HCV agents [7]. The basic role NS3/NS4A is to cleave virus at different functional points as well as involved in viral replication. NS3 RNA helicase affects two different steps in the virus life cycle: (a) RNA replication step of virion in which NS3 is required to unwind the double-stranded RNA intermediate during RNA-dependent replication, that enables the movement of HCV NS5B polymerase [8], (b) NS3 assists in virus assembly and can also act as a scaffold for interaction with viral or cellular cofactors [9], [10]. The crystal structure of HCV helicase shows that it consists of motifs I, Ia, II, III, IV, V, and VI, which are highly conserved. These motifs are located in the ATP binding cleft, and some project residues located at the nucleic acid binding site.
Recently two NS3 protease inhibitors have been approved as a standard care for HCV GT1 affected patients by providing treatment with triple therapy (Peglated-Interferon - α, ribavirin and boceprevir or telaprevir [11] that are available in the market under the brand name Victrelis for boceprevir or Incivek and Incivo for telaprevir. In patients with GT1chronic HCV infection, the treatments with telaprevir/boceprevir based triple therapy are standard-of-care. However, more efficacious direct-acting antivirals (DAA) (Interferon (IFN)-based new DAAs) are available and interferon-free (IFN-free) regimens are imminent in near future. Imminent treatments for individuals infected by HCV will likely involve combinations of compounds that inhibit multiple viral targets. HCV helicase is an attractive target with no available drug candidates in clinical trials. Herein we describe an integrated strategy for identifying fragment inhibitors using computational techniques. Due to increase in HCV infection cases and lack of effective therapies, there is a need to develop specific compounds that can target the HCV [12]. Therefore, this study was planned to molecularly characterize the Pakistani HCV helicase protein. We cloned, purified HCV helicase, determined its 3D structure and docked with different available inhibitors chosen from the family of bioflavonoids. The flavonoids are significant source for developing new antiviral agents. Using computational docking study, we determined active inhibitors against genotype 3a (GT3a) NS3 helicase strain to pave a way to treat HCV patients in Pakistan.
