Introduction
Memory is a cognitive process that is necessary for the stable acquisition of skills or information. This process is crucial for the appropriate learning of any behaviour. The processes of memory can be classified according to their duration in sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory. Sensory memory corresponds to approximately the initial 200–500 milliseconds after an item is perceived. The ability to look at an item and remember what it looked like with just a second of observation or memorization is an example of sensory memory. Short-term memory allows recall for a period of several seconds to a minute without rehearsal. In contrast, long-term memory can store much larger quantities of information for a potentially unlimited duration. The classification of memory based on the temporal extension of the information memorized could also be combined with the type of material to be retained. Thus, spatial memory generally refers to the ability to generate, represent, transform, and recall spatial information [1]. In other words, spatial memory is a cognitive process that enables a person to remember different locations as well as spatial relations between objects. Consequently, it can also be divided into spatial short-term memory and spatial long-term memory. Spatial short-term memory can be described as a system that allows us to temporarily store and manage spatial locations. This allows us to remember where an object is in relation to another object. However, spatial long-term memory can store much larger spatial information for a potentially unlimited duration. The spatial short-term memory is necessary to be able to complete complex cognitive tasks such as those related to aspects of mathematics, especially with number writing and magnitude judgment [2]. This kind of memory also predicts learning outcomes at school [3]. The spatial short term memory can be affected in children with specific language impairment, a persistent disorder that has a negative impact on academic performance [4]. However, the learning difficulties that are more clearly associated with spatial short-term memory impairment are dyscalculia [5] and non-verbal learning disabilities [6]. Some of these studies have examined groups of children using the Automated Working Memory Assessment (AWMA, [7]), which includes subtests for the assessment of spatial short-term memory capacity. Thus, spatial short-term memory is closely related to academic skills and has implications for children's school performance.
There is great interest in the field of human memory, its properties, and neural substrates. However, most of the research in this field has focused on experimental paradigms for the assessment of spatial memory in rodents. The main reason for the significant amount of leading research with rodents is the ethical problems that are derived from research that attempts to understand the human brain circuits involved in memory. Therefore, researchers have used the innate ability of rodents to remember places in order to carry out their studies. Spatial memory tasks adapted for humans involve the simulation of movement through the space by stationary subjects. However, the everyday skills required in memory for locations involves a person's movement through the environment, and the reduced ecological validity of these conventional tasks could be overcome with a tool that combines a strong control of stimuli presentation in real settings.
In this paper, we present ARSM (Augmented Reality Spatial Memory) task, the first Augmented Reality (AR) task that assesses spatial short-term memory in children involving movement. The objective of the study was to prove the value of the ARSM task in assessing spatial short-term memory by comparing the children's performance for the developed task with current approaches for testing spatial short-term memory. The primary hypothesis was that the results for the ARSM task would reflect the spatial short-term memory ability of children in the same way as traditional procedures. In addition, the results obtained with this new procedure would have a relationship with spatial memory performance in everyday life.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 focuses on the state of short-term memory and AR applications related to learning. Section 3 details a preliminary study that was carried out to determine the most appropriate size of the device for the ARSM task. Section 4 describes the task and briefly explains the software and hardware required to develop and run the ARSM task. Sections 5, 6, and 7 present the study, the results, and the discussion, respectively. Finally, in Section 8, a number of conclusions and areas for future research are identified.
