Introduction
Durum wheat is a major staple crop in the Mediterranean basin as a source of semolina for the production of pasta, couscous, burghul and other local products. It is cultivated primarily under rain-fed conditions across a wide range of environments varying in the profile and quantity of rainfall with drought as a major abiotic stress [1], [2]. Regional to global-scale climate models predict, with high confidence, that the Mediterranean region will face soil drying in the future as temperatures rise and this may increase incidents of agricultural drought [3], [4], [5]. This will have serious negative implications for crop productivity and food security and thus crop yield and its component traits are targets for wheat breeders in their efforts to design cultivars for drought-prone environments as a means to ameliorate the climatic problems [6]. However, crop yield and drought resistance are complex genetic traits exacerbated by the fact that drought is often encountered with other abiotic and biotic constraints and these factors have contributed to the slow progress, so far, in breeding for relative drought resistance.
To address these challenges, various national and international efforts have been proposed to enhance wheat production by integrating technologies and approaches in plant science to underpin breeding efforts [7]. Thus, improving our understanding of the crop’s responses to drought stress has emerged as a major target. Genetic studies on durum wheat have identified quantitative trait loci (QTL) for yield and yield component traits as a first important step in understanding and deconstructing the complex genetic factors defining drought resistance [8], [9], [6]. In parallel, studies of plants exposed to water stress under controlled environmental conditions enable the mechanistic understanding of the complex responses, adaptations, acclimation and recovery from stresses at the molecular, biochemical and physiological levels [10], [11], [12]. Genomic tools and ‘omic’ technologies have recently been employed to screen for the genes, proteins and metabolites responsive to water stress, and have identified key molecular elements [13], [14]. Physical stress signals activate a series of molecular cascades and signalling components, both abscisic acid (ABA) and non-ABA-dependent, responsive to abiotic stresses in plants [15]. Common features have been identified in Arabidopsis and grass species [16] which have enabled the initial modelling of gene network responses under water stress [17]. These studies form a mechanistic basis for our knowledge of how physical signals are transduced to biochemical processes which ultimately translate into adjustments of metabolism and physiology to stress. Whilst genetic manipulation of key candidate genes, arising from such studies, has resulted in some form of resistance to water stress in individual transgenic plants, transferring such benefits from model species to improve crop performance under drought has been markedly less successful [18]. There is an urgent need to improve our understanding of drought effects on crops by combining comparisons of cultivars of different field performance with detailed analysis of their resistance mechanisms under well-defined plant water deficits. In addition, it is increasingly argued that systems-based approaches are necessary to integrate knowledge across genetics, genomics, breeding and plant physiology to tackle the complex genetic traits defining drought resistance [19], [20], [21]. Focusing system studies on crop species per se is also advocated considering the importance of genetic backgrounds and species-specific differences in adaptations to stress and for the immediate development of drought resistant crop cultivars, as demonstrated in bread versus durum wheat by [22].
Durum wheat grown in the Mediterranean is susceptible to post-anthesis terminal drought, a phase of growth which directly affects yield. Thus wheat breeders have targeted this type of drought by selecting for cultivars with a fast growth rate that rapidly accumulate biomass before flowering as a water stress avoidance strategy [2]. In addition, they have also developed wheat germplasm of promising yield potential by applying a double gradient selection strategy under both scarce and optimal water environments [8]. These efforts have been relatively successful in terms of yield improvement but the physiological and molecular basis of these drought resistant cultivars remains complex and unclear. Our aim in this study was to dissect the responses of drought resistant durum breeding lines to water stress in an attempt to identify molecular and physiological properties defining stress resistance and thus to build knowledge to accelerate the breeding effort. We chose wheat lines from the breeding programme at the International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) with good yield under irrigated and drought prone environments established in multi-year trials in the field (unpublished observations). Our study targets the post-anthesis developmental phase which corresponds to the period when plants are susceptible to terminal drought under field conditions in the Mediterranean basin. We applied rigorous criteria for the development of the water stress experiments, both in design and measurements, following [23]. High-throughput gene expression technology was applied in parallel with physiological measurements to profile durum lines at a range of water deficits (water stress transients) designed to dissect the systems responses to stress. Mathematical and bioinformatics methods were used to deconstruct the complex datasets and results are presented in formats amenable for further mining and exploration. Analysis was undertaken on datasets at equivalent leaf relative water content (RWC) to establish evidence of differential plant genome stress responses amongst the three wheat lines. Results demonstrate a global transcriptome response to water stress in all three lines that has a systems feature of high levels of coordination and uncovered within that key genome-specific differences. These results are discussed using a systems-based framework of biological robustness theory and how it could impact the search for new breeding strategies for drought resistance in durum wheat.
