Introduction
One of the common malignancies and leading causes of cancer death faced by women around the world is breast cancer. Globally, the death rate of breast cancer has been rising around 2.5 lakhs in 1980 to 4.25 lakhs in 2010 [1]. Even in countries like China and India, its incidence is increased around 30% over the last decade whereas in Japan, Korea and Singapore it was doubled or even tripled [2]. According to National Cancer Institute (USA) statistics, estimated new cases of breast cancer in United States for the year 2013 is 232,340 in female and 2,240 in male whereas estimated breast cancer deaths are 39,620 in female and 410 in male. Some of the common risk factors for breast cancer can be broadly categorized into two types i.e., genetic and non genetic. Among these two risk factors, genetic risk factors constitute 5–10% of the breast cancer cases. Studies showed that fifty one variants in 40 genes are significantly associated with breast cancer risk and among them variants in six genes i.e., BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, PTEN, STK11 and CDH1 show strong association whereas variants in four genes i.e., ATM, CHEK2, BRIP1, PALB2 show moderate association and approximately 20 variants in other genes show weak association [3], [4].
Among the genes conferring high breast cancer risk, TP53 is known to be mutated in 30% of the breast cancers cases with a higher frequency in some tumor subtypes [5]. TP53 encodes p53, which is one of the most important tumor suppressor proteins in human cancers. p53 is a multi domain protein with 393 residues containing i) an acidic N-terminal transcription activation domain (1–44); ii) a proline-rich regulatory domain (62–94); iii) a central sequence-specific well conserved DNA-binding domain (110–292); iv) an oligomerization domain (325–363) and v) a C-terminal domain containing multiple regulatory signals (363–393) [6]. It functions as a tetramer. It is reported that 75% of all the mutations in TP53 are missense, resulting in the substitution of a single amino acid with another and these mutations are predominantly distributed in the exons 4–9, encoding the DNA-binding domain of the protein [7].
Understanding how these single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) affect the function of proteins is an important area of research and an efficient identification of such SNPs would be useful for SNP selection in genetic studies to understand the molecular basis of disease and predicting the effects of in vitro and in vivo mutagenesis experiments [8]. Among the SNPs, non-synonymous coding SNPs (nSNPs) are the one which are located in the coding regions resulting in an amino acid variation in the protein products of genes. They are believed to have a high impact on the phenotype [9]. In the present study, we have focused on the nSNPs in the coding region of TP53 gene having an impact on breast cancer phenotype. We have explored the possible relationship between genetic mutation and phenotypic variation using different computational algorithm tools SIFT, PolyPhen-2 and Mutdb for prioritizing the deleterious breast cancer associated nSNPs from dbSNP datasets.
Molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) on the other hand is an important tool for understanding the effect of mutations on the protein structure, as it provides the information about the protein at atomic level on a reasonable time scale. Previously, several studies have utilized molecular dynamics to analyze the impact of mutations on TP53 [10]–[14]. In order to check (i) whether the three mutants (R110P, P151T and P278A) have an impact on the conformation in the functionally significant regions of the p53C? (ii) Whether the mutant structures are deviating from the native p53C? (iii) Whether the mutants are changing the flexibility of the p53C? we have performed molecular dynamics simulations of WT and three mutants. Since, a significant fraction of p53 appears in apo state at physiological temperature and insufficient zinc is linked to misfolding, particularly in tumorigenic mutations, we performed both apo (Zinc-free state) and holo simulations and are presented here. Results showed that three mutants R110P, P151T and P278A are known to confer deleterious effect in the p53 DNA-binding core domain region (p53C). Overall, the objective of our study is to predict the breast cancer associated nSNPs and to further reveal the conformational flexibility of mutated apo and holo p53C through extensive molecular dynamic simulation.
