Introduction
Countless experiments have shown that neural activity can modify the efficacy or weight of a synaptic connection between two neurons. Specifically, neurons from the neocortex or hippocampus have often demonstrated that Long Term Potentiation (LTP) can be induced by using either high frequency stimulation or pairing low frequency stimulation with postsynaptic depolarization; while Long Term Depression (LTD) can be induced via low frequency stimulation only [1]–[5]. Experiments have further demonstrated that the attributes of cooperativity and associativity between synapses are usually required for the induction of either LTP or LTD [3], [6]–[9]. Furthermore, they have illustrated that distinct types of LTP and LTD have different domains of expression [10]–[12]. Nevertheless, several experiments conducted over the last decade have shown that the property of temporal specificity is also an important determinant controlling the direction of synaptic change [13]–[17]. Specifically, landmark experiments have demonstrated that the precise timing and temporal order between presynaptic input and postsynaptic action potential generation dictates whether a synapse's efficacy is potentiated or depressed [14]–[19]. From these studies, an asymmetric temporal window is found emphasizing that if a presynaptic input precedes the generation of a postsynaptic action potential, then the synapse is strengthened; but if the temporal order is reversed, then depression results. This type of plasticity is consequently called spike timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) [14], [18].
Recent experiments have now started to focus more towards understanding the underlying molecular apparatus responsible for synaptic change [12], [20]–[28]. Unfortunately, a complete description of the molecular signaling network underlying synaptic plasticity, based upon interactions between different signaling molecules, is far from complete. Nevertheless, many experiments have shown that changes in cellular calcium concentration are indispensable for plasticity to occur. Particularly, due to the nonlinear voltage dependence of the N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptor, modest activation has been shown to induce LTD, while strong activation gives rise to LTP [4], [5], [29], [30]. Furthermore, the induction of either LTD or LTP is always subsequently correlated by either a modest or large change in intracellular calcium concentration in the synapse, due to calcium entry via NMDA receptor activation. However, NMDA receptor activation is not the only route where calcium entering the synapse can occur; activation of voltage dependent calcium channels or calcium release from internal stores can also lead to alterations in intracellular calcium concentration.
In parallel to these studies, previous investigations have established that neuronal morphology affects the spread of activity within dendrites in a nontrivial fashion. This naturally led to the proposition of how neuronal morphology affects the expression of synaptic plasticity. A previous experiment has illustrated how the profile of the STDP window varies along the apical dendrite of a layer 2/3 pyramidal cell [31]. Such spatial variations are typically characterized by a broadening of the LTD window and, to a lesser extent, a reduction in the maximal amplitude of the LTP window. Notably, this heterogeneity indicates that activity-dependent modifications may be location-dependent. This is a view further supported by the existence of a cooperative switch determining the sign of plasticity in distal dendrites of neocortical pyramidal cells [32].
The main theoretical effort toward understanding the biophysical basis of bidirectional synaptic plasticity including STDP has primarily focused on the development of a unified theoretical framework. This framework is based upon a simplified calcium-based model, in which a calcium transfer function approximates the final outcome of the molecular signaling network, and where calcium influx via NMDA receptors plays the pivotal role as the sole coincidence detector in determining whether synaptic efficacy is potentiated or depressed. However, current investigations have also begun to shed further insights that have put into question the validity of the single coincidence detector concept underlying plastic change [33]–[35]. In fact, several experiments have suggested that a second coincidence detector or signaling pathway underlies LTD and typically requires calcium influx via voltage dependent calcium channels, as predicted by a previous study [33]–[36]. Furthermore, activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors and IP3 gated release from internal stores have also been implicated, even though their role in STDP has only been investigated in somatosensory pyramidal cells [37], [38]. Whether IP3 gated calcium release from internal stores plays a role in neuronal cell types in different cortical regions has yet to be addressed. In light of these experimental findings, the currently accepted calcium-based model of bidirectional synaptic plasticity needs to be elaborated, especially to describe spatial variations in plasticity outcomes introduced by dendrites.
Efforts in developing a unified theoretical framework have been aimed at understanding the mechanisms underlying plasticity of synapses located on the dendrite. These efforts typically assume a simple yet phenomenological representation of the back propagating action potential, in which details of the spatial extent and active properties of the dendrite have been largely omitted. To date, the underlying mechanisms that can account for the location dependence of the STDP window are currently unknown and require further theoretical and experimental investigation. Efforts in developing a unified framework have, however, began focusing on developing more sophisticated cable based formulation to more accurately describe spatial influences; not just phenomenological approximations. Recently, a theoretical framework called ionic cable theory has been developed, which takes into account the voltage-dependent nature of ion channels and their physically discrete distribution throughout the membrane, and permits analytical solutions to be gained [39]–[42]. This framework has recently been extended to incorporate the spatial effects of reaction and diffusion of calcium [43], [44]. This extension allows an ideal starting point to investigate the effects of calcium-based synaptic plasticity in spatially extended dendrites, and observe any implications of the influence of neuronal morphology on plasticity outcomes.
In this paper, for the first time, we propose that the spatial and active properties of the dendrite play a dominant role underlying the location-dependence of the STDP window. We demonstrate how the properties of the dendrite contributes to location-dependent alterations in the STDP window by incorporating NMDA receptors into an extended version of the original ionic cable theory framework and unifying this construction with a biophysically inspired calcium-based model for bidirectional synaptic plasticity. Using this newly developed cable-based unified framework for bidirectional synaptic plasticity, we not only reproduce the location-dependence of STDP window, but also investigated pairing frequency effects as a function of location along a dendrite. Our study predicts a novel increase in the repetition pairing frequency required to switch from LTD to LTP for negative post-pre pairings and further suggests a nontrivial activity dependent multi-dimensional parameter space for inducing synaptic change along dendrites.
