Introduction
Extracting physiologically relevant features and understanding the control underlying biological time-series data is challenging due to potential multiple time-scale components, non-linear relationships among physiological measures, and feed-forward/feed-back control of the system [1]. Analyzing cortisol pulsatility is challenging due to multiple endocrine systems each with its own regulatory mechanisms including circadian modulation and cortisol feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, [2]–[4]. Additional analysis challenges include hormone assay error, limitations in hormone sampling rate and individual biological variations. Pulse identification and physiologically based modeling techniques have been developed to quantify cortisol pharmacokinetic parameters and to test plausible physiological mechanisms controlling cortisol pulsatility [5]–[25]. Limitations to these analysis techniques include the need for the user to choose parameters before beginning analysis, the presence of simplifying assumptions that may not be appropriate for the data set (e.g. homogenous compartments), and the need for different methods for different hormones. Our proposed novel analysis is presented to overcome these limitations.
In addition, our method is designed to select and quantify key qualitative features originally identified during visual inspection of frequently-sampled cortisol hormone time-series data. These qualitative features include differences in pulse frequency and amplitude during sleep and wake, and inter-individual differences in circadian variation in cortisol pulse amplitude. A motivating observation was that these qualitative differences could be explained by the concept of hierarchically organized rises and falls in the data independent of cause (e.g. sleep-wake state, assay error and difference in the signal to secrete). The goal was to develop a technique that required a minimum number of assumptions and that could be applied across a wide number of conditions including different populations including both healthy controls and individuals with altered hormone concentration profiles.
We present our conceptual framework by applying it to cortisol time-series data (Figure 1). In this paper, we demonstrate that HAP analysis of cortisol data (a) identifies salient events in multiple time-scales (e.g., pulses in one time-scale and trends in another), (b) quantifies accumulation and dissipation rates, some of which correspond to standard pharmacokinetic parameters, and (c) characterizes a hierarchical organization of the data. Although HAP is motivated by cortisol concentration profiles, the analysis structure is general enough to apply to other signals.
10.1371/journal.pone.0104087.g001Figure 1
Hierarchically embedded cortisol pulses.
An example adapted from experimental data (black line) with six major cortisol pulses. For a Single Pulse Rise (U1) starting at time ∼3.5 hours, the single pulse peak is identified with  and the starting nadir/valley is identified with a V1. The pulse rise is defined as the rise in cortisol concentration from the nadir (V1) to peak (P1). The pulse rise time (Uw1) is the time required for the cortisol concentration levels to rise from a sequence of pulses starting with the local nadir (V1) to the peak (P1). The Hierarchical (multiple) Pulse Rise (U2) occurs as the change in concentration from the first nadir (V2) to last nadir (P2), which is a local maximum nadir, in the rise portion of this hierarchically organized segment. The hierarchical pulse rise time (Uw2) is the elapsed time between V2 and P2 of the rising portion. The effect of the hierarchical pulses between V2 and P2 is an accumulation or increase in cortisol. Similarly, sequences of pulses associated with the dissipation or decrease in cortisol begin at time ∼4.8 hours.
