Introduction
Computer-assisted image analysis is an emerging technology for diagnosis, therapy and follow-up in making observer-independent and reproducible readings, and can improve the workflow compared with conventional image analysis. Time-efficient image post-processing with correct interpretation is of great importance, considering the increasing speed of data acquisition on the one hand and the extremely large amount of data available for interpretation on the other. Computer-assisted image analysis is a special challenge for the liver because of motion and deformation during respiration, multi-phase image acquisition and segmental anatomy with four different tubular systems. Although multiple approaches for computer-assisted image analysis have been introduced for oncologic liver resection, living-related liver transplantation and interventional oncology there seems to be still a lack of satisfactory solutions for the clinical routine [1]. For patients with end-stage liver disease, liver transplantation is the most effective treatment [2]. The great increase in the number of patients awaiting liver transplantation during the past years has led to a significant shortage of cadaveric organs [3]. Living-related liver transplantation has emerged as a valuable alternative, and allows healthy adults to donate a part of their own liver to a compatible recipient [4], [5]. Since the convincing results associated with low risk for the healthy donor and improved outcome for the diseased recipient compared with cadaveric liver transplantation, living-related liver transplantation becomes more and more common [6], [7]. For the clinical success after living-related liver transplantation, the liver volume plays a key role [8], [9]. For donor and recipient, the post-operative liver volume must be large enough to fulfill metabolic demands [10]. Additionally, the liver graft should not be oversized since compression can lead to liver necrosis and impaired wound healing with potentially fatal outcome for the recipient (large-for-size) [11]. Currently, non-automated CT-volumetry can be regarded as the preoperative standard to assess liver anatomy and the future graft size [12]. After clinical estimation of the adequate graft size for the recipient (e.g. using the “graft weight to body weight ratio”), the most suitable segments for liver donation can be defined on the basis of CT-volumetry [13]–[15]. With this background, we defined the objective of our study: to evaluate accuracy of estimation of graft size for living-related liver transplantation using a semi-automated interactive software for CT liver volumetry (P). We hypothesized that CT-volumetry performed with P can predict accurately graft size while improving workflow compared with a manual commercial software (TR).
