Introduction
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with I-123-labelled cocaine ligands for the presynaptic dopamine transporter (DAT) is widely used for the diagnosis of Parkinsonian syndromes and for differentiation between Alzheimer’s and Lewy body disease [1]–[8]. It is also used for monitoring progression of presynaptic dopaminergic degeneration [9]. The interpretation of DAT SPECT is based on visual evaluation of the images supported by semi-quantitative analysis [10]–[16] both of which are affected by photon attenuation in the head [17].
There are several methods for attenuation correction (AC) in brain SPECT. The most widely used method, proposed by Chang [18], is based on post-processing of images reconstructed without attenuation correction. However, this method has three limitations. First, delineation of the outer contour of the head is required which is prone to errors in case of both manual and automatic threshold-based methods [19]. Second, Chang’s method assumes a uniform attenuation coefficient throughout the whole head which is an approximation only. Third, it is an approximation even if the actual attenuation coefficient is uniform. It is strictly correct only for a point source (at least in its non-iterative form).
Errors associated with these limitations of the Chang AC might be avoided by modelling attenuation within the reconstruction process using the correct attenuation map, for example measured by low-dose x-ray computed tomography (CT). Whereas CT-based AC has become standard in positron emission tomography (PET) of the brain, it is not widely used in brain SPECT, despite the increasing availability of dual-modality SPECT/CT systems. CT-based AC could provide more accurate AC than the Chang method and, therefore, has the potential to improve both semi-quantitative analysis and visual interpretation of DAT SPECT.
The aim of the present study was to compare CT-based AC and Chang AC in dopamine transporter SPECT with N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-I-123-iodophenyl)nortropane (I-123-ioflupane). The impact of the AC method was assessed on both semi-quantitative analysis and visual evaluation of the SPECT images by independent readers blinded for clinical information.
