Introduction
We present an example of agent-based model reduction, which is defined as simplifying a detailed agent-based model while preserving the model's statistical characteristics. In this sense, the reduced model acts as an emulator of the original, full model. A more traditional model-building approach proceeds in the reverse order: starting as simple as possible and adding more details only if the model fails to sufficiently reproduce reality. This approach, which can be described as a top-down process, relies on a solid understanding of causal mechanisms. Because many locally different causal mechanisms can produce the same aggregate behavior, a simple model based on the wrong causal mechanisms could suggest erroneous system response to real intervention [1]. A model built using the alternative bottom-up process starts with a detailed description of the observed behaviors with the goal of providing higher fidelity to the causal mechanisms. However, because it is not always clear which behavioral details are critical for reproducing the observed global patterns, the level of detail in such models may go beyond what is necessary to obtain the relevant information from the simulation. This approach has been discussed before in the context of infectious disease modeling [23] and in the context of social segregation [24]. However in these studies the focus was primarily on the concept of model reduction, not on the identification of the driving mechanisms. In this paper we perform a bottom-up model reduction process on a model that simulates a local heroin market and that has been published elsewhere [2], [3].
Despite significant funding to fight heroin use, heroin markets show surprising resilience as described in recent news articles and reports [4]–[6]. This resilience suggests that better understanding of the actual functioning of drug markets is needed. At the same time, a number of economic models have been developed to identify and forecast market components and operations [7]–[10]. Ethnographic methods applied to medical and cultural anthropology show that heroin markets do not follow traditional economic patterns. As described in Hoffer [11], “The difference here is subtle but clear: dealing heroin is a social behavior with economic outcomes rather than an economic behavior with social outcomes.” On the local market level, the economics of heroin transactions involve customers purchasing the drug directly from street dealers or private dealers, or through street brokers serving as intermediaries.
A recently developed agent-based model called the illicit drug market simulation (IDMS) used ethnographic data [2] to describe in detail the functioning of the Larimer open-air heroin market in Denver, Colorado, from 1992 to 1996 [2], [3]. This paper focuses on methods for developing a reduced version of the IDMS to increase efficiency while maintaining fidelity to the full model. We also examine the utility of a reduced model and the methodology for developing the reduced model. Section 2 presents an overview of the IDMS model. Section 3 describes the procedure for model reduction. Sections 4 and 5 present comparisons of the full and reduced model. Finally, section 6 presents a discussion and concluding remarks.
