Introduction
Hydrological time series forecasting plays an increasingly important role in the planning, management and optimal allocation of water resources [1]. However, it is still a difficult task due to the complicated stochastic characteristics existing in hydrological series. Further, hydrological processes are affected not only by climate change [2]-[3], including precipitation, evaporation and temperature, but also by human activities and socioeconomic development [4]. Therefore, the hydrological time series always tend to be nonlinear and time-varying [5]. The complex nonlinearity, high irregularity and multi-scale variability make the forecasting of hydrological time series a difficult task. Although many researchers have investigated the problem of hydrological time series forecasting [6]-[7], completely understanding of hydrological processes has not yet been achieved. The forecast accuracy of the current forecasting models is still not high, especially for complex time series.
The current approaches to hydrological forecasting can be divided into two categories: the process-driven models and the data-driven models [8]. Models in the first category mainly consider the internal physical mechanisms of hydrological processes, and they usually need a large amount of data for calibration and validation. However, there is not always enough data available [9]-[10]. The data-driven models are known as black-box methods [11], and they do not consider the physical hydrological process, instead identifying the relationship between the inputs and the outputs mathematically. The data-driven models have been proved to have the advantage of lower demands for quantitative data, better prediction performance and simpler formulation than the process-driven models [12]-[13].
The data-driven models developed in recent decades contain two main categories: traditional statistical techniques and artificial intelligence (AI) tools [14]-[15]. The statistical models can provide good prediction results when the series are linear or near-linear, but they cannot capture the nonlinear patterns hidden in hydrological time series. The nonlinear and AI models include artificial neural networks (ANNs), genetic algorithms (GAs) and support vector machines (SVMs), which provide powerful solutions to nonlinear hydrological forecasting [16]-[18]. However, these AI methods have their own shortcomings and disadvantages. For example, ANNs often suffers from overfitting, and SVMs are usually sensitive to parameter selection.
To overcome the shortcomings of the data-driven models described above and obtain results that are more accurate in forecasting, many hybrid models have been proposed and applied in hydrological series forecasting [19]-[20]. Recently, some hybrid models based on the principle of ‘decomposition and ensemble’ have been proposed. The main purpose of decomposition is to simplify the forecasting process, and the results of ensemble are used to evaluate the forecast performance. Forecast models of this type have already been applied in the field of hydrology research. For example, Kisi [21] used a combination of linear regression model and discrete wavelet transform to predict the river stage. Nourani et al. [22] and Kisi [23] combined the wavelet technique with ANNs to predict rainfall or streamflow time series. Sang [24] developed a method for discrete wavelet decomposition of series and proposed an improved wavelet modeling framework for hydrologic time series forecasting. The results of these studies prove that the ‘decomposition and ensemble’ principle based forecasting methods reduce the difficulty of forecasting and outperform the single models.
However, there are still many problems in prediction when using the ‘decomposition and ensemble’ principle. First, previous researches show that the widely used method presently in decomposing the hydrological time series is the wavelet analysis. However, the effectiveness of the wavelet decomposition is affected by many factors. For example, the accurate wavelet decomposition of series is still a problem and it depends heavily on the choice of wavelet basis function [25]. Second, the results of ensemble are usually defined as the sum of the individual forecasting results [26]. However, this is unreasonable, primarily because the degrees of importance of the intrinsic mode function (IMF) and the residual components are different [27]. In addition, the complicated hydrological time series usually contain noises and show complex characteristics due to the random or uncertain factors of environment [28]-[29], and the hydrological time series forecasting models without considering denoising may influence the prediction accuracy [30]-[31].
To overcome the above three shortcomings, we propose three improvements to promote the prediction accuracy based on the principle of ‘decomposition and ensemble’. The first improvement is to reduce the noises involved in hydrological time series before decomposition, which has a great influence on the forecasting accuracy and may result in over-fitting or underfitting problems [32]. Thus, a novel four-stage hybrid model is developed, consisting of denoising, decomposition, component prediction and ensemble. The second improvement is to adopt more accurate and effective methods for the four stages. During the denoising stage, the empirical mode decomposition (EMD)-based method is employed. The improved EMD method, ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD), is selected as the decomposition tool. Unlike the wavelet analysis and almost other previous decomposition methods, the EMD method describes the local time scale instantaneous frequencies better and does not need any predetermined basis functions [33]-[34]. Another advantage of the EMD-based technique is that it is very suitable for nonlinear and nonstationary time series. The third improvement is utilizing the ANN model instead of simply adding together the individual forecasting results to obtain the ensemble results. Additionally, we choose more reasonable cases with different characteristics and comparison models to thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed hybrid-forecasting model. In this paper, we compare our method with other six different methods using six different cases.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief introduction to the methodology of the four stages mentioned above. Section 3 introduces the cases and data used in the evaluation of the proposed model. Section 4 presents and discusses the results of the case study. Finally, Section 5 provides the conclusions of the paper.
