Introduction
In a study with rats, Tolman [1] observed that they seemingly hesitated when they had to choose between one of two rooms, one of which contained a reward while the other was empty. The only cue differentiating the rooms was the color of the doors. A black door indicated that the room provided a reward, and a white door indicated an empty room. To reach the reward, the rats had to learn the relationship between the color of the door and the presence of the reward. During the learning phase, the rats were seen moving their heads from one door to the other as if they were considering which one to choose, which was referred to by Tolman as a conflict-like behavior called vicarious trial-and-error (VTE). In his experiments, Tolman noticed that the number of VTE events (i.e., the number of times that the rat shook its head during one trial) increased at the onset of the learning phase but started to decrease when the performance was stabilized. Based on this observation, VTE has been connected to learning efficiency.
Following Tolman's observations, other researchers started paying attention to the presence of VTE. Hu and Amsel showed a hippocampal contribution to VTE [2]. Johnson and Redish recorded place cell activity in rats' hippocampus, and they observed VTE when the rats were simulating their next decisions internally before acting [3]. These results led to the hypothesis that VTE reflects deliberative decision making, which is a cognitive process that includes searching, predicting, and evaluating future outcomes [4]. This process is computationally slow compared with automated decision-making processes, such as habituation and reflex. But deliberative decision making allows ongoing control to achieve flexible behavior. One rat experiment [5] supports this hypothesis; the authors observed high VTE when the rats were uncertain and had to think about their decisions in the following three conditions: 1) error trials, rather than correct trials; 2) the next trial after making an error (i.e., potential error trials); and 3) when the rats had to switch their strategy.
VTE-like behavior has also been found in other animals. In a human experiment [6], the participants showed VTE-like behavior when they had to actively, instead of passively, explore a given environment. They performed better with VTE-like behavior in the active condition. Tarsitano et al. [7] found that in a detour task, jumping spiders displayed two phases of action: the inspection phase, when the spiders stopped and inspected possible routes toward a target, and the locomotory phase, when the spiders moved toward a single direction. VTE was observed during the inspection phase. Tarsitano concluded that “one can speculate that it is a small but significant jump to use trial and error when choosing a goal to approach.” However, in animal experiments, it is difficult to observe the neural dynamics, which makes it hard to directly investigate the mechanism behind VTE and its resulting behavior.
There are some theoretical models of VTE; Rossler took up VTE as a sign of private simulation [8], and Ikegami studied it as an example of embodied chaotic itinerancy [9], that is, the itinerant motion of an autonomous robot with chaotic instability. From the Bayesian theory view point, Johnson et al. posited that VTE occurs with changing task demands [10]. Still, those models lack body and environment structure that will spontaneously generate VTE.
In this paper, we tried to understand whether VTE is an emergent property of a physical body moving around in its environment. We also investigated the link between VTE, neuronal dynamics, and the efficiency of VTE toward learning. Our methodology is to make a simplified abstract model of VTE, rather than making a biologically elaborate one. This experiment has its basis in the field of evolutionary robotics, where basic features of living organisms are recreated by simple robotic systems [11], [12]. This is to study the essential logic underlying living systems, such as autonomy, evolvability, and embodiment [11]–[15]. In this paper, we especially focused on embodied properties of living organisms. Embodied cognition is the notion that the nature of the mind is determined by the physical characteristics of the body and the environment, rather than controlled only by the central nervous system [13]–[15]. For instance, Bovet and Pfeifer [16] showed the spontaneous development of coherent behaviors in robotic experiments – reward-seeking behavior for instance – just by moving around the environment with a physical body. In their experiment, the robot utilized the morphological structure of whiskers and the physical properties of various sensors, such as infrared or vision sensors. By learning the relationship between those different types of signals, the robot successfully reached the reward. This experiment suggests the important notion that intelligent behavior can emerge from the simple interaction between the body and the environment.
We therefore composed a simple robotic model of VTE to show the underlying mechanism responsible for the observation of VTE and the advantages provided by it, in terms of learning and in terms of dynamical systems. The model that we used is based on Bovet's T-maze learning robots [16], which we reproduced in computer simulations. The model that we used is similar to the environment used when the rats showed VTE. As a result, we demonstrated analogous VTE patterns to those reported in the experiment with rats, in terms of the temporal change in the number of observations, that is, high at the beginning of learning and lower afterward.
In addition to the similar pattern to rats, we have found other patterns of VTE using different parameters, which we classified into the following three groups: 1) a high number at the beginning of learning and low afterward, 2) a low number during the whole learning period, 3) and a high number all the time. From the comparison of the types of VTE, we demonstrated that VTE is associated with the chaotic activity of neuronal dynamics. Depending on the three types of VTE, we also compared the robots' behavior to evaluate adaptability by changing the environmental conditions. The robots with the low VTE pattern changed their behavior drastically due to those perturbations, even exhibiting 0% success, while those with the high-to-low VTE pattern were robust to the perturbations. We suppose that VTE causes sensory fluctuations, enabling our robot to continuously change the connectivity pattern of the neurons. In other words, VTE allows the robot not to have to follow the same trail in a maze, enabling it to change its neural activity. This allows the robot to learn in an ongoing way by continuously gathering information from the environment, creating robust behavior. This reminds us of the concept of “homeodynamic adaptation” suggested by Iizuka and Di Paolo [17] – an agent-based cognitive model of morphological disruption where internal instability allows behavior that is adaptive to changes in the body.
The organization of this paper is as follows: In the Methods section, we detail the environmental set-up and the neural model. This is followed by the Results section for results and analysis of the behavior of the robots. The Discussion section then focuses on the role of VTE and the mechanism behind it in the light of adaptability.
