Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a major chronic metabolic disorder and an extremely serious condition from both clinical and public health standpoints. Nearly 5% of the world’s population is affected by diabetes. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) projections, the diabetic population is likely to increase to 300 million or more by the year 2025 [1]. Current studies in India indicate that there is an alarming rise in the prevalence of diabetes, which has gone beyond epidemic to pandemic proportions [2]. Diabetes imperils public health through various complications such as retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy, ischemic heart disease, stroke and peripheral vascular disease [3]. Despite the advances in medicinal science, diabetes remains a burning health issue worldwide. Even though the insulin therapy and oral hypoglycemic agents are the first line of treatment for the disease, they show side effects and fail to significantly alter the course of diabetic complications. Due to these reasons, there is a growing interest in herbal medicines [4].
Since time immemorial, herbal remedies have been the highly esteemed source of therapeutics for various diseases. These remedies show great value in treating and preventing diseases, and are currently becoming more mainstream in clinical practice. Herbal medicines are frequently considered to be less toxic and possess fewer side-effects than synthetic drugs [5]. India is sometimes referred to as the botanical garden of the world because it is the largest producer of medicinal herbs and is endowed with a wide diversity of agro-climatic conditions. In India, a number of plants are mentioned in the ancient literature of Ayurveda and Siddha for the treatment of diabetic conditions. Indigenous remedies have been used in India for the treatment of diabetes mellitus since the time of Charaka and Sushruta [6]. Many Indian plants have been investigated for their beneficial use in different types of diabetes [7]. A number of medicinal plants and their polyherbal formulations are being used for treating diabetes in Ayurveda, Siddha and ethnomedicinal practices [8]–[10]. In the traditional system of Indian medicinal plant formulations, combined extracts of plants are used as the drug of choice rather than individual plant extracts [11]. It is believed that the synergistic effect of combined extracts of many plants is more beneficial than extract of a single plant. The inherent anti-diabetic property of these plants is due to their phytochemicals.
Phytochemicals have been the single most prolific source of leads for the development of new drug entities from the dawn of drug discovery. They cover a wide range of therapeutic indications with a great diversity of chemical structures. A number of pure compounds from plant sources were reported to show a blood glucose lowering effect [12]. However, due to extreme complexity both in chemical components and mechanisms of action, the proper use of phytochemicals is still a challenging task and further hinders the effort to design novel anti-diabetic drugs, using the therapeutic principles of herbal medicines. Knowing the biological and chemical basis of pharmacological properties of phytochemicals is important for the identification of novel anti-diabetic drugs. Therefore, due to their extensive use and the therapeutic effects, there is an increasing interest and need to rigorously evaluate the mechanisms of action of herbal products.
This problem could be partially alleviated by the application of comprehensive and advanced computational tools, which might help us to understand the biological and chemical basis of the pharmacological action of phytomedicines. The biological basis of pharmacological action depends on the protein targets on which the phytochemicals act and the pathways involved. The chemical basis of pharmacological action depends on the structural scaffolds of the active compounds. Therefore, structure-based computational approach would help in understanding the critical components responsible for the anti-diabetic activity of the active compounds. Thus, sophisticated computational methods enable us to investigate the complex mechanism of action of drugs and circumvent the challenges associated with biological experiments.
In the present study, we have utilized an integrated network analysis approach of systems biology and chemical analysis approach of structural biology to predict the mechanism of action of anti-diabetic plants and their active compounds. This study would facilitate the understanding of two important aspects. The first one is that since a number of anti-diabetic plants are available, it becomes difficult to identify which among them are important for preparing effective anti-diabetic formulations. In this study, we have tried to address this issue through network analysis of anti-diabetic plants, active compounds, their protein targets and pathways. However, these plants contain a lot of active compounds and they in turn target many proteins and pathways. Therefore, identification of important anti-diabetic plants becomes a daunting task. In this regard, we are proposing the following hypotheses to identify the important anti-diabetic plants, active compounds and protein targets.

Hypothesis 1
The anti-diabetic plants with maximum number of active compounds would have good anti-diabetic property.

Hypothesis 2
The active compounds that are present in many anti-diabetic plants may be therapeutically important.

Hypothesis 3
The active compounds that target many proteins have therapeutic relevancy.

Hypothesis 4
The proteins that are targeted by many active compounds are important.

Hypothesis 5
The protein targets that are involved in multiple pathways related to diabetes are important.
The present study was designed to examine these hypotheses. In order to infer hypothesis 1 and 2, a network containing anti-diabetic plants and active compounds was built and analyzed. To infer hypothesis 3 and 4, a network containing active compounds and protein targets was built and analyzed. Further, to infer hypothesis 5, a network containing protein targets and pathways was built and analyzed. Therefore, through network analysis, inferences were made for these hypotheses. These inferences would assist in the identification of important active compounds and thus the anti-diabetic plants containing these compounds could be used for preparing anti-diabetic formulations. Further, by conceptualizing this entire analysis, a strategy for preparing new anti-diabetic formulations has been proposed in this study.
The second aspect is to identify the biological and chemical basis of pharmacological action of phytochemicals. This was achieved through network analysis of phytochemicals and their respective protein targets and pathways involved in diabetes. Further, pharmacophore analysis of the phytochemicals, combined with docking studies, provided insight in to their mechanism of action.
This entire study is conceptualized into three levels (Figure 1). The first level is the selection of anti-diabetic medicinal plants of Indian origin, identification of their active compounds, protein targets and pathways from the available literature and existing databases. The second level involves construction and analysis of meaningful networks from the collected data. In the third and the final level, target-enrichment was carried out to enhance the set of multi-targeting active compounds through pharmacophore feature analysis, structural similarity and docking studies. Pharmacological promiscuous bioactive compounds are gaining increased attention in the field of drug discovery. In this regard, the current target-enrichment approach would extend the path for the identification of novel multi-targeting bio-active molecules, deciding the fate of various diabetes-related pathways and thus would aid in the treatment of diabetes.
