Introduction
With the development computers and digital techniques, ink-jet printing has been widely used in many applications, such as organic chemistry [1]–[4], electronics [5], [6], nanotechnology [7], [8], [9], and tissue engineering, etc. The recording coating in the ink jet printing (RC-IJP) affects the printing quality. The adsorptive ink capacity of the recording coating is evaluated by the per unit area adsorptive ink weight, it is an important factor in ink jet printing. If the per unit area recording coating weight is invariant (uniform), an excess of ink causes diffusion of the ink on the recording coating, while a sub-optimal amount of ink influences the ink absorption and leads to poor quality in printing.
Nano-silica is widely applied as pigment particle in recording coating. Its size, distribution and the specific surface area influences ink adsorption. Big specific surface area causes the strong adsorption capacity; the dispersibility of the recording coating is more uniform in terms of the more adsorptive ink. Polyvinyl alcohol is generally used as binders on recording coating. Its molecular structure influences the absorption effect too. The high molecular weight of polyvinyl alcohol leads to a close molecular structure, this structure causes fastness on adsorptive ink drop and excellent water-resistance; small molecular weight causes loose structures, which lead to easy ink impregnation and clear colors. These results influence the clarity and permanent properties of the image. In order to enhance the printing quality, the analysis of the adsorptive ink capacity of RC-IJP is very important. Further, rapid analysis of the adsorptive ink capacity has never been reported.
Near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is a very rapid, accurate and non-destructive method for simultaneous measurements on different constituents in various products [10]–[12]. Nowadays, the traditional method is human eyeballing for the adsorptive ink capacity of RC-IJP. However, this non-technical method is associated with large deviations. The aim of this study was to develop a non-destructive and rapid NIR spectroscopy method for the prediction and control of the adsorptive ink capacity of RC-IJP.
