Introduction
Epithelial ovarian cancer is the leading cause of gynecologic cancer deaths in the Western world [1]. Approximately 70% of epithelial ovarian cancers are detected at an advanced stage. Although about 80% of the patients have complete remission of the disease after treatment with extensive debulking surgery and chemotherapy, the recurrence rate is very high. Currently, there are no curative treatment options for patients with recurrent disease and the 5-year survival rate is less than 30% [1]. In order to improve upon this poor survival rate many studies have tried to identify more sensitive early detection markers and methods for discriminating between different pelvic masses [2], [3]. A large number of these studies used various mass-spectrometric methods to search for new markers in patient material such as serum [4]. The OVA1 test, which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2009, was one of the first multimarker diagnostic tests that resulted from this type of research [5]. However, when Moore et al. [6] evaluated several of these biomarkers alone and in combination with CA 125 in prediagnostically collected sera from women in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening trial the addition of these biomarkers to CA125 did not improve sensitivity for preclinical diagnosis. Other strategies involve a combination of known serum biomarkers such as Human Epididymal secretory protein 4 (HE4) and CA125 in a discriminatory algorithm such as ROMA (Risk of Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm) [7]. Most of the biomarkers being investigated or used in the clinic today are serum-based proteins, which are logical targets both for use as biomarkers for screening and diagnosis, as well as potential drug targets. However, most of the recently found biomarkers in serum or plasma are acute phase proteins that are not specific for one type of cancer or disease [8]. In fact, only a few FDA approved cancer markers in current clinical use are tumor-derived proteins (e.g., prostate-specific antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen), and are present in serum at very low concentrations (1-10 ng/mL) only [9]. In this study we have tried to overcome the problematic aspecific aspects of blood-based protein markers by aiming to identify proteins differentially expressed between tumor tissue samples of patients with a serous adenocarcinoma of the ovaries versus a benign serous tumor. In tumor tissue the potential marker proteins are present at much higher concentrations, which could facilitate protein identification. By comparing the protein content of tumor tissue with that of serum samples, we aimed to detect or infer reliable tumor-produced serum biomarkers. Directly studying tumor tissue, even though it enhances the probability of finding tumor-derived markers, is challenging nevertheless. Accurate analysis of tumors is often hampered by within-tumor heterogeneity, for example due to the presence of contaminating stroma cells, necrosis or infiltrating lymphocytes [10]. Laser microdissection minimizes this problem via the rapid and reliable isolation of a specific cell population or type from a tissue section under direct microscopic visualization [11], [12].
Using laser microdissection we obtained homogenous tumor samples that were subsequently measured with a mass spectrometric approach called LC-MSe. LC-MSe differs from traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA) modes in that all precursor and fragment ions are measured by alternating the collision energy between a low (precursor ions) and elevated (fragment ions) profile without selection of ions. Thus LC-MSe is able to identify and quantify more peptides in complex samples using a single dimension reversed phase ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) separation, than DDA on quadrupole time-of-flight instruments (QTOF) [13], [14].
The primary objective of the present study was to identify differentially expressed proteins in tissue and serum, comparing benign and malignant serous ovarian tumors. After initial protein identification we performed extensive pathway and network analyses in order to find differences in the underlying protein pathways associated with benign and malignant ovarian tumors.
