Introduction
In ecological studies, consideration of spatial structure can lead to useful insights regarding the process of interest (see, for example [1]–[3]). If the process exhibits clustering, then parameterised models which describe the spatial structure can provide a greater understanding of the behaviour of the species [4]. However, accurately determining parameters that describe a population can be a difficult problem within the natural environment. Measurements are often expensive and difficult to make, and so usually only a sparse sample of a population is available. In this paper we propose a new method for estimating the parameters of a cluster process from a sparse set of quadrat samples with arbitrary design, i.e. any sampling design such as transects, random etc. can be used without damaging the estimator.
The key theoretical framework upon which this work is built is the Gaussian process (GP), which can be defined as a collection of random variables, any finite number of which have a joint Gaussian distribution [5]. The Gaussian process framework can provide a useful tool for modelling stochastic processes and has seen much attention recently within the machine learning community, where it is used to solve regression and classification problems. GP regression has been widely studied within the field of geostatistics where it is known as kriging [6]. Under this guise it has also been given limited attention within the field of ecology (see, for example [7]–[9]). The kriging equations represent a special case of a Gaussian process.
In this paper we prove that the GP framework provides a useful route to estimating the parameters of a stochastic process, and has several advantages over previously published methods of achieving the same. The Neyman-Scott Poisson process is used as an example in this derivation, as this general cluster model has been widely studied and applied to naturally occurring populations (see, for example, [10]–[13]). The estimation is performed by fitting a theoretical covariance function to the empirical GP counterpart by numerical optimisation.
The standard approach to estimating the parameters of a cluster process is based upon the K-function developed by [14]. This estimation procedure assumes that the spatial process has been mapped over the whole survey area. This is not always practical and so alternative methods have been developed based upon line transect surveys. Most of these have only been developed to estimate the mean intensity of a population based upon a partial mapping, and cannot separate all of the parameters. However, Cowling [4] developed a method for estimating all the parameters in a two-dimensional Neyman-Scott process based upon a one-dimensional K-function along the transect line. An error in Cowling's derivation of the K-function was corrected in [15], where it was concluded that the corrected method clearly outperformed competing methods.
In this paper an alternative method for Neyman-Scott parameter estimation is developed, based upon GP regression. An experimental arrangement similar to Cowling is used, with the same transect sampling design. Experiments with alternative sampling designs are then tested to demonstrate the resilience of the technique.
