Introduction
Forest fires are a major concern in many countries, like United States, Australia, Russia, Brazil, China and Mediterranean Basin European regions [1]–[3]. Every year forest fires consume vast areas of vegetation, compromising ecosystems and contributing to the carbon dioxide emissions that are changing Earth's climate [4]–[5]. Besides the long-term economic implications associated to the climate change, forest fires have direct impact upon economy due to the destruction of public and private property and infrastructures [6]. Fires are mainly caused by natural factors, human negligence, or even human intent. Fire propagation and burnt area depend on many natural factors and conditions, not only on the terrain orography and the type of vegetation, but also on the efficacy of detection and suppression strategies. Moreover, fires caused by incendiaries contribute to increase the complexity of the phenomena. Understanding the underlying patterns of forest fires in terms of their size and spatiotemporal distributions may help the decision makers to take preventive measures beforehand, identifying possible hazards and deciding strategies for fire prevention, detection and suppression [7]–[8].
Forest fires have been studied using classical statistical tools. However, those methods reveal limitations, both in capturing all characteristics underneath forest fires dynamics, and the evolution along years [9]. Forest fires dynamics exhibits correlations in size, space and time. Size-frequency distributions unveil long range memory, which is typical in complex systems. Correlation between data is characterized by self-similarity and absence of characteristic length-scale, meaning that forest fires exhibit power-law (PL) behaviour [10]–[13].
Several studies have been published during the last years about this topic [14]–[17]. In references [18]–[19] it is shown that forest fires exhibit PL frequency-size relationship over many orders of magnitude and that such behaviour seems consistent with the self-organized criticality arising in complex systems. The most important practical implication of such results is that the frequency-size distribution of small and medium fires can be used to quantify the risk of large fires [19]. Nevertheless, some authors [15] suggest that a simple PL distribution of sizes may be too simple to describe the distributions of forest fires over their full range.
In reference [20] the time dynamics of forest fires is investigated and it is shown that forest fires exhibit time-clustering phenomena. More recently, the fractality of the forest fires was addressed in [21] using spatial and temporal fractal tools. The authors prove that these phenomena exhibit space–time clustering behaviour.
In this paper we look at forest fires from the perspective of dynamical systems. A public domain forest fires catalogue containing data of events occurred in Portugal, in the period 1980 up to 2012, is addressed. The data is analysed in an annual basis, modelling the occurrences as a sequence of Dirac impulses. Therefore, instead of modelling individual forest fires, we are describing the global dynamics along several decades. In this perspective, mutual information and visualization trees, generated by hierarchical clustering algorithms, are used. The Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) tool is adopted in order to compare and to extract relationships among the data. Finally, we propose an amplitude-space embedding technique that produces a clear fire pattern classification.
