Introduction
Interest in modelling higher education as a complex system has grown rapidly during the last decades. Although relevant across the whole spectrum of higher education, the fields of physics, mathematics, and engineering are presently in the forefront of research in this area [1]–[5]. Thus far, this research has mainly taken a theoretical approach to educational issues in higher education. There are only a few exceptions where empirical processes have been analysed from a complex systems point of view, for example, the conceptual understanding of physics [6], physics students' affective learning [7], learning-for-teaching in mathematics [8], and student retention in physics and closely related engineering [9].
Previous research into higher education as a complex system lacks, as Sabelli et al. [10] suggest, a system simulation methodology through which researchers and practitioners can pose “what if” questions. These simulations should take into account the nonlinear feedback and interaction effects that are present in higher educational systems [4], [10], where multiple parts of the system adapt to the suggested implementation. Further, these models should be constructed somewhere between the general and the localized so that they can be compared, but also be useful to the local context studied [10].
There are generally two ways of constructing a skeleton for system simulations of processes within higher education; one theoretical, and the other empirical. The approach proposed by Sabelli et al. [10] represents an attempt to construct a skeleton from a theoretical basis. A problem with such work is that simulations of such a system will result in the outcomes of the theoretical skeleton being limited by the skeleton itself – the conclusions drawn are only as reliable as the assumptions made in the underlying theory. In this article we present an alternative route to deal with this problem: we demonstrate an empirical path to create a skeleton for the simulation, and propose a framework for performing such “what if”-simulations. As a fruitful way to create such a framework, we propose a generalizable and adaptable methodology in order to identify complex interactions in educational systems. We use Multilayer Minimum Spanning Tree and Monte-Carlo methods to propose a way to explore how manipulation of these systems may be affecting educational outcomes. Additionally, we report on what our simulations suggest are the most important factors for improving educational outcomes.
We have chosen to focus on the credits students achieved, which is an integral part of student retention, as the target of our analysis. This is because a critical first step for students continuing towards graduation is for them to complete their courses, thus getting the credits needed to continue their studies, also called academic withdrawal [11]. Internationally, enhancing student graduation rate has received a great deal of attention over the last ten years, especially in science and engineering [12]. However, implemented institutional actions to address the problem have not had the anticipated effect, as evidenced by the unchanging (or even declining) graduation rates in all areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics [13].
Researchers, building on central models of student retention - which academic withdrawal is a part of [11], [14]–[15] - have found empirical inconsistencies when predicting student retention. Examples of inconsistencies are the predictive power of age and gender [16], students' goal commitments [17], and financial aid to the students [18]. The emergence of these inconsistencies indicates that even after the identification of many of the critical aspects of students' educational experiences, estimating the effectiveness of proposed changes in institutional practices remains highly problematic. This is probably because most parts of an educational system are interrelated, i.e., are complex [4], [19]–[21]. Consequently, in such an interrelated system, the ability to identify aspects that produce both effective and ineffective changes to educational practice becomes of paramount importance [22].
In an effort to address this challenge, we report on the creation of a virtual ‘Sandbox University’ (SU), where changes in institutional practice can be simulated, estimated, and compared. The SU is empirically estimated based on questionnaire data consisting of first-year study experiences obtained from engineering students who have physics as a part of their curriculum at the highly regarded Technical University of Delft. We do this in order to: 1) create a localized model which can inform local institutional practice; and, 2) create a system in which it is possible to circumvent the problem that proposed changes can be hindered by exogenous processes of the real-world system. For example, the changes forced on the SU will be “noiseless” – that is free of influence from a changing external environment outside the system being studied, which is of course impossible in the real-world system [23]. Thus, our research question is: how can targets for changes in institutional practice be effectively identified using an empirically-informed Sandbox University?
