Introduction
Everyday decisions are often made in the presence of risk and uncertainty. Risk refers to multiple possible outcomes, positive and negative, that could occur with well-defined or estimable probabilities [1]. The neural correlates of financial decision making have been extensively investigated in the field of neuroeconomics where ‘risk’ refers to monitoring monetary outcomes. These studies suggest that decision making is a complex process where monetary gains and losses are associated with activity in multiple brain regions, namely, the basal ganglia, ventral prefrontal, insular and cingulate cortices [2]. Individual differences, such as age, brain injury, addiction, or past experience exist in the preference of risk and outcomes.
Naturalistic decision making, for instance in a real-world task, involves choices that can physically harm oneself or others, and may have delayed consequences [3]. In these situations, individual differences are key factors that shape brain activation and the decision making process. Few studies have characterized the decision making process that takes place in the real world – possibly due to the lack of ecologically valid tasks required to observe real-world behaviors [4]–[6]. In this study, we assessed naturalistic decision making and related brain function in a pilot's decision to land in bad weather—a decision making task that has obvious real-world consequences.
Some of the deadliest aviation accidents, with over 70% lethality, have taken place in the areas of flight planning and decision-making in bad weather [7]. This is because approach and landing are two of the most demanding and critical flight phases requiring formalized sequences of actions and judgments (e.g. perform a visual inspection for landing, lower the landing gear, extend the flaps, etc; see [8]). Navigating an aircraft is a complex, time-pressured activity, influenced by individual difference factors such as level of expertise, age, cognitive and neural capabilities [9]–[12]. For instance, higher expertise was associated with less deviation in lateral positioning during instrument approaches [13] and visual approaches [11], indicating experts' closer performance to the ideal landing approach pattern.
To elucidate the neural correlates of pilots' crucial decisions in real-world flying conditions such as bad weather, our study employed a series of short simulated instrument approach-and-landing scenarios in the fMRI scanner. The scenarios were based on those used in the Kennedy et al. [13] instrument landing-decision study, and were adapted to the fMRI environment. For the fMRI landing decision task, both the flight simulator's “thru the window” display and the instruments (which all airplanes have for flying without visual references) were modified for laptop display and projected on to the fMRI head coil mirror. An fMRI-compatible joystick was used for “flying” inside the scanner. The fMRI task was comprised of two scenarios: high risk (poor visibility due to heavy fog–legally unsafe to land) and low risk (better visibility due to medium fog–legally safe to land). During an instrument approach, pilots' eye movements are directed at the instruments, as well as the landing visual markers at the decision height (DH) of 200 feet altitude. No feedback or compensation was offered to study participants; the pilot's motivation to make a safe landing decision was personal safety and following the FAA rules for visual cues that need to come into view at the DH.
The characteristics of our real-world task led us to focus on certain brain regions involved in decision making. Traditionally, evidence from neuropsychological tasks such as the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) [14] and the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART) [15] have led to the development of a neuroscience systems-based model [16] identifying striatum (i.e. caudate and putamen), ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), and amygdala as the brain regions involved in assessing the cost and benefit of a pending decision [17]–[18]. The caudate and putamen, as part of the basal ganglia, have a key role in contextually-based motor decision-making, i.e. deciding if and when to correct a given movement by initiating corrective sub-movements [19]. Moreover, the caudate, as part of the basal ganglia-superior colliculus (SC) pathway, plays a role in the initiation of saccadic eye movements [20]–[21]. Importantly, eye movement strategies have been associated with skill and expertise in baseball batting [22], billiards [23] and flying [24]. The involvement of eye motor movements in our aviation decision-making task and its role, in general, in skill and expertise persuaded us to choose bilateral caudate as the primary region of interest (ROI).
The present study used a comprehensive and relatively unbiased data-driven approach to create the primary ROI by combining large-scale meta-analysis of functional activation during decision making with structural ROIs from a human brain atlas. Specifically, we relied on the “Neurosynth” database (http://neurosynth.org) that contains automatically generated meta-analysis maps for several thousand psychological terms and topics [25]–[27]. Therefore, it is possible to compute whole-brain functional maps for individual cognitive and psychological concepts.
In this study we aimed to characterize, in terms of performance and brain activity, the individual contributions of aviation expertise to the crucial decisions pilots make when they land in bad weather. To do this, participating pilots varied in their aviation expertise.
