Introduction
Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene expression that are not attributable to alterations in the DNA sequence. DNA methylation is a well-known epigenetic marker that plays an important role in the control of gene activity and the architecture of the nucleus [1]. Evaluation of the level of methylation at all cytosine nucleotides in an individual's genome (called the “methylome”) has recently become possible with the advent of next generation sequencing techniques, specifically sodium bisulfite sequencing [2], [3]. Many different PCR-based methods for the detection of DNA methylation have been developed [4].
Archived human tissues, with known clinical follow-up, represent a valuable resource, particularly for retrospective genetic and epigenetic studies and identification of biological markers that might be useful for risk prediction of disease or prognosis [5]. Biopsied or surgically excised tissues obtained for routine histopathological analysis and diagnosis are widely available, and often formalin and paraffin embedded (FFPE) for decades. However, to date there is no suitable platform to assay genome-wide methylation in these widely available samples. With the increasing interest in understanding the genetic and epigenetic basis of diseases, the ability to extract DNA from these FFPE samples represents an invaluable source of diagnostic material that can be used for genomic analyses and translational studies.
Using DNA from old FFPE tissue may be problematic, as the DNA is often degraded and only limited amounts may be available. The quality of FFPE specimens decreases with time [6] because of linking of nucleic acids and proteins, as well as fragmentation of nucleic acids [5]. Historically, FFPE samples were not considered as a viable source for molecular analyses because the nucleic acids may be heavily modified by protein-nucleic acid and protein-protein cross linking [4]. Furthermore, sodium bisulfite treatment [6], which preserves methylation marks, and as such is necessary for PCR-based studies of DNA methylation, may further degrade the DNA. However, the effect of storage time on the ability to detect genome-wide methylation in FFPE tissues has not yet been documented.
Laser-assisted microdissection is a proven method for isolating specific cell populations for molecular profiling [7]. It can cut particular cells of interest from a tissue section attached to an underlying membrane. In the present study, the identification of ovarian epithelial cells relied on morphological cell characteristics observed after routine histological staining. The system is based on an infrared laser that captures the ovarian epithelial cells of interest from tissue sections mounted on glass slides [7].
In this study, we extracted DNA from epithelial cells within human ovarian FFPE tissues that were obtained from two different individuals and stored for different numbers of years. Using our DNA extraction method, we tested and compared the whole genomic DNA methylation levels in these differentially aged samples using a series of steps including bisulfite conversion, whole genome amplification, purification of amplification, sequencing using a Junior 454 sequencer, and bioinformatics analysis.
