Introduction
Subterranean termites are tropical social insects having an economic impact in the billions of dollars all over the world each year [1]. For this reason, their patterns of movement have fomented both practical and theoretical studies in the past. Most of these studies, however, have concentrated in displacements at colony level and inside tunnels leaving the study at the individual level largely overlooked. Also, while animal movement in the context of resource acquisition has received a fair deal of attention [2]–[5], its links to individual interaction and –ultimately– to sociality still need better focus. Providing that interindividual interactions lie at the very heart of sociality [6] and that interactivity depends on movement and space [7], effective space exploration must play prominent role in social behaviour in general, and in termites in particular [8].
A common misconception about termite spatial orientation is that physical restrictions imposed by tunnel walls would guide effective space sweeping. While this could be true for termites foraging within tunnels underground, once inside their nest the scenario changes completely. There, galleries merge and split in unpredictable ways usually forming an entangled set of paths and chambers whose layout does not seem to help orientation in most cases. Termites could, then, be guided by specific chemical cues and vibratory signals to effectively find nestmates. But would that be entirely dependent on external clues? Or, as sustained by a long forgotten hypothesis [9], would termites orient themselves concatenating external stimuli with an optimized search strategy, as with other animals [10]?
Here we present evidence in favour of such a hypothesis, describing exploratory spatial behaviour in isolated termite workers kept in large containers, free from the constrained movements they experience within tunnels. In this way we were able to assess individual free exploratory behaviour in clueless environments and away from social interactions. We conclude that their searching patterns are compatible with scale-free strategies based on a fractal exploration of space and that these are key to the efficient flow of information between nestmates, thereby providing expressive hints on how self-organization underlies social cohesion [11].
Our study includes the analysis of anomalous diffusion where the mean squared displacement (MSD) is estimated as a base to identify superdiffusive aspects of termites movements. Within the framework of anomalous diffusion theory [12], [13], the scaling exponent of the MSD is related mathematically to a Lévy probability distribution  of the steps lengths l, with . We evaluate these relationships and compare them versus the results that can be extracted from a Kolmogorov structure functions analysis. We progress into exhibiting that a termite walking is a  noise process with power-laws in the correlation function indicating long-memory that is compatible with the fractal structures revealed by an Iterated Function System algorithm. Finally, we use maximum likelyhood estimation (MLE) to show that waiting times with power-law scaling exponent values are also present in the termite exploratory behaviour with scaling exponents values compatible with those predicted by the physics of transport phenomena.
