Introduction
Anionic–selective glycine receptors (GlyRs5) play critical roles in fast neuronal communication and in neural development. This neurotransmitter-gated channel is a member of the pentameric ligand-gated channel (pLGIC) superfamily of receptors (also referred to as Cys-loop receptor due to a conserved disulfide loop in each subunit) that also include GABA receptors (GABARs), nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), and serotonin receptors (5HT3Rs). Each pLGIC subunit has a large N-terminal extracellular domain (ECD), with a ligand-binding site located at the interface between adjacent subunits [1], [2]. Each of the five subunits has four membrane-spanning segments, with the second segment lining its central gated pore. Upon binding of ligands in the ECD, complex allosteric changes in conformation result in transient opening of a distant gate in the central pore in the transmembrane domain of the receptor and subsequent desensitization [3]. Thus, conformational changes driven by the free energy changes upon ligand binding in the ECD are structurally coupled to channel gating events, presumably via associations/contacts between this domain and the transmembrane domain (TMD, which include the loops connecting transmembrane segments) [4]–[7]. This functional coupling of the ECD and TMD in GlyR is supported by the presence of point mutations in the interfacial loops linking these two domains in GlyR sequences of some individuals with hyperekplexia, a neurological disease characterized by an excessive startle response wherein channel gating is effectively uncoupled from ligand binding [8].
The available experimental structures of pLGICs include a cryo-electron microscopy structure of Torpedo nAChR at 4 Å resolution [9], crystal structures of a C. elegans glutamate-gated Cl channel [10] and homologous bacterial pLGICs [11]–[15], an X-ray structure of a monomeric form of an ECD of nAChR [16], and X-ray structures of acetylcholine binding protein (AChBP; a homolog of nAChR ECD) bound to a variety of ligands [17]–[23]. However, these structures have not provided any direct evidence on the molecular details involved in interactions of the receptor with its cognate ligands and any subsequent allosteric effects of ligand binding, nor do they provide any direct information regarding the structure of the ECD of GlyR. In previous studies, we created and tested homology models of the ECD of GlyR based on AChBP and nAChR-ECD as templates [24]. Although AChBP has limited sequence identity to the ECD of Cys-loop receptors, biochemical and high-resolution structural studies have shown that it is a good template for modeling of these domains [25], [26]. Our initial three-dimensional structure of the GlyR-ECD pentamer was constructed using comparative modeling and further refined using equilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) simulations resulting in the model of the fully hydrated pentamer that was stable for the entire 5 ns simulation. The relative structural drift measured as the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of Cα atoms from the initial structure was <3.5 Å, a relatively small value considering that the starting structure was a homology model. This stability indicates also that AChBP, despite low sequence identity with pLGICs, is a very good template for its ligand binding ECD. The structure of the binding pockets in the homology model was also consistent with published biochemical studies. While homology models provide insight into protein structure and function, these models carry uncertainties with respect to molecular details at high resolution, particularly in regions where sequence variability is highest. In the case of the ECD of Cys-loop receptors, these variable regions include the ligand binding pockets and the subunit interfaces as these areas define the unique features of receptor subtypes, such as ligand specificity and stoichiometry upon assembling. Thus an experimental approach (such as chemical crosslinking coupled with mass spectrometry (MS), as utilized in this study) that provides direct and indirect structural information about the protein, employed in combination with computational modeling has the potential to resolve some of these uncertainties. In addition, the integration of modeling and systematic experimental measurements has the potential to identify subtle conformational changes associated with receptor gating and desensitization.
Chemical crosslinkers can function as molecular rulers as covalent inter- and intra-subunit bonds provide distance constraints that may be used to refine tertiary and quaternary structures of proteins [27]–[30]. Chemical crosslinking/MS analyses have been used to provide structural information for modeling membrane proteins and larger macromolecular complexes and are capable of providing critically needed information regarding local conformational dynamics [31]–[37]. With respect to pLGICs, there is a rich history of using crosslinking studies to elucidate receptor structure and function [38]–[47]. In this study, we used a soluble crosslinking agent that does not require mutagenesis to introduce potential crosslinkable moieties but instead reacts with accessible endogenous Lys residues. Dimethylsuberimidate (DMS), a homo-bifunctional amine-reactive reagent, specifically crosslinks primary amine groups (i.e., ε-amino groups of lysine residues) and has been widely used to map low-resolution protein structures [48]–[50]. Due to its high sensitivity, mass accuracy, and high throughput, MS has the unique ability to provide large amounts of structural data in systems (e.g. low abundance proteins and/or very large complexes) not easily handled by conventional techniques [28], [35], [51], [52]. The coupling of crosslinking studies with subsequent mass spectrometric (MS) analyses allows one to sensitively identify introduced crosslinks, even if reaction products are in low abundance.
pLGICs, similar to other integral membrane proteins, provide a hurdle to characterization as they are typically expressed at fairly low abundance and are embedded in the lipid bilayer which provides a hindrance for many biophysical techniques typically used to characterize protein structure. With respect to the latter concern, pLGICs may be solubilized by detergents, but this substitution of a membrane-mimetic environment for the natural bilayer still makes characterization difficult and may affect native structure. In order to focus on the ECD of GlyR and to eliminate the need for solubilizing agents and ease difficulties presented by the particulate nature of the bilayer, we have chosen to conduct experiments on a soluble, truncated form of GlyR. We have previously expressed and purified a pentameric glycine-binding protein (GlyBP) that was shown to be a structural and functional homolog of its corresponding ligand binding domain in full-length GlyR [53]. Examination of GlyBP can thus be expected to provide important insights into the tertiary and quaternary contacts in pLGICs, particularly in GlyR, whose experimental structure is poorly resolved. Herein we report our efforts to obtain structural information provided by crosslinking/mass spectrometry (MS) studies of GlyBP to identify and differentiate intra- and intersubunit crosslinks. Our computational GlyBP model provides the template wherein we evaluate whether we can differentiate these two classes of crosslinks. By comparing the assigned crosslinks derived from MALDI-TOF (Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization – Time Of Flight) MS studies of monomeric or oligomeric bands after SDS-PAGE, assignments were made identifying inter-subunit crosslinks and intra-subunit crosslinks via identification of parent mass ions. All assigned crosslinks were consistent with our computational model, providing confidence that we can distinguish inter- and intra-subunit crosslinks in our homomeric protein. Thus crosslinking/MS studies are potentially capable of providing a network of intra- and intersubunit constraints to critically evaluate and refine structural models of GlyR and other pLGICs.
