Introduction
Multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is TB resistant to the two most powerful first-line anti-TB drugs: rifampicin and isoniazid. It is an increasing problem globally, with 630,000 estimated cases of MDR-TB among 12 million total cases of TB in 2011 [1]. Treatment for MDR-TB is lengthy, complex and can incur severe side-effects including deafness [2]. Adherence rates for treatment can thus be low [3]. In 2006, WHO launched the global Stop TB Strategy, as the internationally recommended approach to reducing the burden of TB. This strategy has six major components, of which component 5 is: ‘Empower people with TB, and communities through partnership’ [4]. There are a few examples of TB programmes that aim to give TB patients a voice in decision-making, in developing and implementing TB programmes or in taking more control of their care process [5]. However, general consensus about how TB patients can best be involved in treatment and care is lacking, and research into this area limited.
There are several examples of patients' involvement contributing to improved care provision, such as the development of cancer network partnership groups in the UK. These groups have been credited with enabling more effective and responsive cancer services through health-care professionals working with service users [6]. Patients have been said to use social media to change their interactions with providers, with technology supporting shared decision-making and facilitating communication between patients and providers, which enables patient-centred care and a shift towards treating the whole patient rather than just the disease [7].
There is now widespread and increasing access to the internet and use of social media, including in low and middle income settings. It is predicted that by 2015 over 3 billion individuals and businesses will have social networking accounts [8]. Mobile technology is increasing in reach with mobile phones frequently having internet connections, allowing those without computers to also access the web. Social media has been said to provide a useful tool for sharing health care information [8], [9], [10], with 61% of patients reportedly seeking support and medical information online [11].
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) established a blogging project in March 2011: TB&Me (http://blogs.msf.org/tb/), whereby MDR-TB patients around the world can document and share their experiences of living with the disease in order to raise awareness about MDR-TB. By September 2012, 13 MDR-TB patients had blogged on this website, either directly or with assistance, from the UK, Australia, Philippines, Swaziland, Central African Republic, Uganda, South Africa, India and Armenia. 10 of these 13 bloggers had received treatment and care for MDR-TB from MSF, with the remaining three being non-MSF patients.
The initial plan for the MSF blogging project was reviewed by the MSF Ethics Review Board as it was recognised that there could be potential harm as well as benefit for participants. There has been minimal research on this topic, particularly relating to TB, MDR-TB and patient perceptions around the potential benefits and risks of involvement with social media. Due to the emerging nature of social media and increased recognition of the supportive role it can play in health, the lack of existing research on the potential for this tool in supporting MDR-TB treatment and the innovative nature of the TB&Me blog, it was decided to conduct a qualitative study to examine patient and staff experiences of the blog. Our aim was to identify potential risks and benefits associated with blogging to enable us to determine whether social media had a role to play in supporting patients with MDR-TB.

Background to the TB&Me project
When the blogging project was initiated in 2011, potential bloggers for the TB&Me site were identified by MSF project staff. In some cases they were patients who had already taken part in communication activities. After the project had started, certain TB patients not being treated by MSF contacted the project via the TB&Me website to express their interest in blogging on the site. Potential bloggers were given information about the blog, the blog's purpose and what blogging involved. Bloggers took part in the project voluntarily, with the project being clearly explained and informed consent being received prior to blogging commencement. MSF patients were informed that choosing not to take part in the blog or stopping at any point would not affect the services they receive in any way.
The blogging process was often assisted by project staff, for instance by collecting the blogger's response orally and transcribing it to the computer for those who were not computer literate or did not have access to a computer (subsequently referred to as “assisted bloggers”). Care was taken to ensure that the project staff member assisting the blogger was not directly responsible for the blogger's MDR-TB treatment. Bloggers who were not receiving TB treatment from MSF wrote blog entries themselves in English. Of the ten MSF bloggers, eight were assisted bloggers and six of the resultant blogs were translated into English. Blog entries were minimally edited to address only security concerns, defamatory comments or medically inaccurate information in addition to spelling and grammar. All non-minor changes were discussed with the patient and the patient's acceptance of the new version ensured before the blog was posted. Project staff would regularly provide feedback to assisted bloggers, including reading them any comments received on their blog entries.
The blog has provided a platform to reach a potentially wide audience. Over 50,000 people visited the TB&Me blog in the 8 months preceding September 2012, with 18% of visits occurring from mobile telephone access and most website visits occurring from the US (37%), UK (15%) and South Africa (10%). In September 2012 there had been 267 comments made on 94 posts on the blog alone, not including those on Facebook or Twitter, which are not as easily tracked.
