Introduction
Medication errors are particularly hazardous for critically ill patients and can increase the risk of adverse outcomes in this population [1]. The patients in an intensive care unit (ICU) will typically experience a mean of 1.7 errors per day. Nearly all patients in an ICU will be affected by a potentially life-threatening error at some point during their stay [2]. Medication errors account for 78% of the serious medical errors in an ICU [3], [4].
Many clinicians already use a computerized physician order entry (CPOE) system in their routine patient care, and the adoption of CPOE systems and electronic health records continues to increase worldwide. The use of electronic prescriptions should make the process safer and ensure that key fields include meaningful data as well as deliver clinical decision support for critically ill patients who are receiving highly complex medications. However, these benefits do not always occur, and error rates may increase with order complexity. For example, results from a controlled laboratory study measuring the rate of prescription errors associated with inpatient CPOE found that the mean error rates ranged from 1.5% to 2.6% depending on order complexity [5]. Another study examining the effect of CPOE systems in a pediatric ICU found several types of new errors, such as incorrect infusion rates for continuous infusions and incorrect selections of multiple dosage options available for some drugs [6]. In addition, results from a retrospective study showed that new types of errors were experienced with an electronic prescription system, differing from those commonly found when using a paper system [7]. Together, these studies illustrate that any systemic change can have unintended consequences. However, little is known about how prescription errors affect the subsequent processes, how many errors reach patients, and how prescription errors are treated by nurses.
To determine the nature of medication errors introduced by a CPOE system, the present study investigated the three continuous phases of the point-of-care medication process (i.e., prescription, administration, and documentation of medications), in addition to nurses' responses to these errors. The aims of this study were twofold. First, the current study aimed to determine the incidence, causes, and types of errors associated with the prescription, administration, and documentation phases of the medication process in an ICU setting using a CPOE system. The second aim of the current work was to identify the relationships between prescription errors that occurred using a CPOE system in the different phases of the medication process and the nurses' responses to these errors.
