Introduction
There is increasing recognition of the urgent need to improve the quality, quantity and spatial detail of information about soils to respond to challenges presented by growing pressures on soils to support a large variety of critical functions [1]–[4]. Arrouays et al. [3] argue that existing soils information is not well suited to addressing vital questions related to mapping, monitoring or modelling soil processes that are driven by fluxes or changes in soils of water, nutrients, carbon, solutes or energy. Conventional models of soil variation describe variation in the horizontal dimension using polygons comprising classes of named soils [5]. In the vertical dimension, variation is described in terms of classes of horizons or layers that vary in their properties, thickness and depth. These conceptual models of discrete variation of classes of soil in horizontal and vertical directions are not well suited for use in many of the (global) simulation models and decision making systems currently used to describe and interpret soil functions and processes, such as supporting crop growth modelling, modelling hydrological and climatological processes, soil carbon dynamics or erosion [2], [5]. Most modern spatial models that require information about soils as an input need accurate numerical information about continuous variation in soil properties. Models also require input data layers that are complete, consistent and as correct and current as possible. These requirements are not well met by current sources of soils information, especially sources of global extent.
Soil is probably one of the least well described thematic layers at the global scale, and existing global soil maps are often of undocumented or unknown accuracy [5]. At the moment, only coarse scale soil maps of the world are available at an effective resolution of about ∼20 km [10]. The most commonly used global soil maps include [2], [5]: Harmonized World Soil Database (HWSD) [11], USGS-produced soil property maps (http://soils.usda.gov/use/worldsoils/mapindex/) and ISRIC-WISE based soil property maps [12].
While widely used and cited, these various coarse resolution soil maps tend to suffer from artefacts due to use of different soil mapping concepts between countries and regions, from variation in the underlying soil mapping scale (usually between 1∶0.5 M to 1∶5 M) and from differences in reliability of source data within and between continents [2], [5]. They can also not easily be updated with new information and often lack any measure of uncertainty, which is assumed to be significant. In summary, currently available global soil maps are not comparable in level of detail, spatial accuracy and usability with other global environmental layers such as global land cover and climatic products (Figure 1).
10.1371/journal.pone.0105992.g001Figure 1
Spatial resolution and temporal coverage/publication time of some widely used global environmental data layers (global soil layers have been highlighted): GLWD — Global Lakes and Wetlands Database, HWSD — Harmonized World Soil Database, MOD12C1 — MODIS Land Cover Type Yearly L3, MOD13C2 — Vegetation Indices Monthly L3, CHLO/SST — MODIS Aqua Level-3 annual Chlorophyll/mid-IR Sea Surface Temperature, FRA — Forest Resources Assessment, GPW — Gridded Population of the World, DMSP-OLS — Nighttime Lights Time Series, GlobCov — Land Cover classes based on the MERIS FR images, GADM — Global Administrative Areas, TanDEM-X — Germany's topographic radar mission.
Key agenda setters in the terms of production and dissemination of remote sensing and thematic environmental layers at the beginning of the 21st century include: NASA's MODIS (Moderate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) and Landsat products — in terms of thematic content and usability [6]–[8], and Germany's TanDEM-X new global 12 m resolution DEM with ±2 m vertical accuracy [9]. Based on information retrieved on February 15th 2014. was produced using the Global Soil Information Facilities (GSIF), which was recently developed at ISRIC as a framework and platform to support widespread, open collaboration in the assembly, collation and production of global soil information.

In this paper, we present and describe SoilGrids1km — a global 3D soil information system at 1 resolution — as a first response to the need for a new, consistent and coherent, global soil information. SoilGrids1km was produced using the Global Soil Information Facilities (GSIF), which was recently developed at ISRIC as a framework and platform to support widespread, open collaboration in the assembly, collation and production of global soil information.
