Introduction
A major research topic of intelligent transportation systems (ITSs) is the development of systems that will be capable of controlling the flow of vehicular traffic through crossroads, especially in urban environments [1]. ITS architecture provides a framework for the much needed overhaul of highway transportation infrastructure. The architecture's immediate effects include alleviating vehicle-traffic congestion and improving operational management to promote public safety via collision-avoidance improvements. Equipping vehicles with various onboard sensors and implementing vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication will allow for large-scale sensing, decisions, and control actions in support of these goals [2].
Thus, innovative parking systems that meet near-term parking demands are needed. With wireless communication, computer, control, and electronic technologies, intelligent service-oriented parking management can improve parking space utilization and driver experiences while decreasing drivers' frustrations. The parking process can be a straightforward and non-stop process. From the management viewpoint, smart parking is an intelligent parking system. The parking process can be modeled as a birth-death stochastic process, and revenue can be predicted [5].
In urban areas, traffic congestion [6] is a major recurring problem in many countries due to the increased level of traffic, increased urbanization and the availability of cheaper vehicles. A wireless-enabled device called an onboard unit (OBU) allows a vehicle to set up a high-speed wireless link with road-side units (RSUs) using V2R communications. An RSU is strategically located at a critical position in the road systems. These OBUs and RSUs constitute a VANET that assumes the missions of traffic safety and intelligent transportation system control and management as well as supports any applications for the vehicles [7].
IEEE 802.11p radio technology is directly derived from IEEE 802.11a technology with some modifications for adapting to vehicular environments. This technology uses 75 MHz of the licensed spectrum, from 5.85 to 5.925 GHz, as part of the intelligent transportation system for dedicated short-range communications (DSRCs) in the USA [3]. The allocation of 75 MHz in the 5.9 GHz band that is licensed for DSRCs [4], which supports seven separate channels, could also enable the future delivery of rich multimedia content to vehicles within a short-to-medium range via either V2V or vehicle-to-roadside (V2R) links in VANETs.
To address the possible spectrum resource limitation in VANETs, cognitive radio has been considered as a potential solution. Cognitive radio (CR) networks have recently emerged as a promising technology for improving the utilization efficiency of the existing radio spectrum [8]. In a cognitive radio network, users opportunistically access the existing wireless spectrum without interfering with existing users.
This work contributes to the current literature via four objectives: 1) To accomplish finding a parking space by using a cellular automata (CA) mechanism and a cognitive radio network model; 2) To reduce the time required to find a parking space and to avoid annoying the driver; 3) To raise the success rate, efficiency and stability of a parking space-finding process by a recommendation mechanism; and 4) To balance the temperature and reduce the CO2 on the main sections of roads.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 describes the proposed mechanism and algorithm. Section 4 compares the proposed method with existing methods with reference to both analytical and simulation results. In Section 5, conclusions are presented, and recommendations are proposed for future research.
