Introduction
The maize (Zea mays L.) root is designed to provide anchorage as well as to secure uptake of water and nutrients, including nitrogen (N), in an efficient manner [1], [2]. Maize roots are formed partly during embryonic and partly during post-embryonic development [3]. There are five main types of roots in maize: crown, seminal, primary, lateral, and brace roots [4]. The major portion of root biomass of mature plants is derived from postembryonic, shoot-borne roots. These postembryonic roots include crown roots, formed below soil surface, and brace roots, formed above soil surface [5]. Their function is important to plant performance as they are responsible for the majority of water and nutrient uptake in maize [5].
Two to three week old seedling root systems are made up of primary roots, lateral roots, seminal roots, and root hairs [4], [6]. Lateral roots branch outward from the primary root. These root types are called the axial roots and determine root architecture. Lateral roots increase the surface area of the root system and all root types contribute to water and nutrient uptake [2], [7], [8]. Moreover, lateral roots contain root initiation points, leading to secondary, tertiary, and higher order root structures, with major influence on the overall root architecture of the root stock [2].
There is extensive genetic variation in root architecture. However, root traits have not been considered by plant breeders to select for improved nutrient uptake efficiency or yield improvement due to the difficulty in measuring root traits and their quantitative mode of inheritance [9]. Studying adult roots using maize “shovelomics”, a high-throughput phenotyping technique that measures adult root traits, is time consuming and laborious. This method of phenotyping is also destructive because roots are dug out of the ground. This limits the number of experiments that can be completed in a season [10]. Changes in maize root architecture may strongly affect yield [11]. Seminal roots play a key role in the acquisition of immobile and mobile nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen respectively and can determine spatial and temporal domains of its environment and inter-root competition [6]. The relationship between seminal root biomass in hydroponics and root lodging in a field study focusing on root strength and pulling resistance has been explored. Respective correlations were low, but statistically significant. Correlations found in hydroponic seedling root traits compared to adult field traits were r = 0.44* for shoot weight and adult plant height, and r = 0.22* for lateral root length with brace root development [12], [13].
Seedling phenotyping takes less time, is less laborious, and can be repeated many times during the year allowing for quicker turnover of results. Positive but low correlations were found between maize seedling and adult root traits, such as number of seminal roots and weight of seminal roots to root pulling resistance (r = 0.07 and r = 0.36*, respectively) [14]. Expanding the number of seedling root traits and improving respective phenotyping procedures, may increase the chance of capturing strong relationships between different growth stages in maize.
Using digital imaging software to automate phenotypic analysis is an innovative and efficient way of accurately taking measurements of plant physiological traits [15]–[19]. Roots have been difficult to phenotype in a high throughput manner due to a lack of simple access and their highly plastic nature. With the development of custom root analysis systems, quantitative studies of root systems are now possible [20], [21]. There are several software frameworks that extract root morphology traits in two-dimensions in various hierarchies of automation. This ranges from manual root labeling like DART (Le Bot and Serra, 2009), to semi-automated software like WinRhizo (Pro, 2004), a commercial root analysis tool, and EzRhizo [22], a freely available software, all the way to full integrated imaging-analysis platforms like SmartRoot [23] for small root systems and recent platforms, allowing for automated measurements as well as invoking a ranking system for root traits [17].
These software frameworks have substantially enhanced the research community’s ability to efficiently analyze and accumulate massive amounts of data. They also pioneered the utilization of graphical user interface (GUI) that enables ease of use. However, most of these software frameworks are either expensive, not expandable to increased (or decreased) dimensions, or cannot be fine-tuned to a specific setup. We developed an open-source, modular, easy-to-use and efficient root system architecture characterization software called ARIA (Automatic Root Image Analysis). This is based on a mathematically rigorous approach of converting root images into graphs. We show how extracting a variety of traits becomes a simple process of utilizing various graph algorithms. There are several major advantages to such a graph based approach to extracting root system traits: (a) graph based methods are well-studied and have very fast and efficient algorithms (for example, used in Google, Facebook, most GPS devices etc.) that enable fast, real time data analysis, (b) graph based methods are easily scalable (having almost linear computational complexity) and, hence, can be easily extended to larger problem sizes without compromising on time (with direct implication to large 3D tomography datasets), and (c) a graph-based approach is generic. That is, by making trivial modifications to the definitions of parameters like edges, weights, and labels, a huge variety of traits can be accessed. This makes a graph based framework trivially extendable. Furthermore, graphs are dimension independent, and hence this framework is trivially extendable to 3D root image analysis.
In this study, the utility of ARIA has been tested by phenotyping 384 maize inbred lines using scanned images of seedling roots. These data were then applied to a genome wide association study (GWAS) to detect marker-trait associations. Measurements of the trait Total Root Length were analyzed for a comparative GWAS study, as this is the only trait shared between the current platform WinRhizo Pro 9.0 and ARIA. The objective of this study is to show that our new and freely accessible root phenotyping software ARIA is a fast and accurate platform for automated phenotyping, with the potential of adding additional features when compared to the established software WhinRizo Pro 9.0. For both programs, significant marker trait associations were found using a general linear model. Also, phenotypic measurements with both programs were compared using a 74 maize inbred line panel [24] to further validate utility of ARIA. The results of this study show that ARIA is an accurate and dependable tool for completing large phenotyping experiments, needed for many quantitative genetic studies. Its flexibility makes ARIA a very useful tool to breeders and biologists studying root architecture.
