Introduction
Computer simulations of the protein folding process have in the last ten years reached amazing level of description and accuracy [1]–[16]. The power of the computers and the understanding of the physics that governs folding allows now for a large screening of the experimental data for instance collected in the Protein Data Bank [17]. From a theoretical point of view a successful approach is the“minimal frustration principle” (MFP) [18]–[20] in which protein folding is described as a downhill sliding process in a low frustration energy landscape (“funnelled” shaped) towards the native state. While MFP has been proven for lattice heteropolymers [19], [21]–[27], in more realistic protein representations a residual frustration which prevents the systematic prediction of the native structure of natural sequences is often observed. Off-lattice instead MFP is used as a main justification for the use of structure-based potentials such as the GO [28] and elastic models [29]. In fact, there is still space for development of transferable models that are capable of systematic associating the experimentally determined native structure to natural sequence. Surprisingly, with the exception of few notable examples [30]–[38], it has also been extremely difficult to artificially construct sequences capable of folding into given target protein structures. The group of David Baker [38] introduced a novel procedure to select sequences with low frustration capable of correctly refolding in vitro to their target structure with a success rate between 8% and up to 40% of the total trials. In their work the authors have introduced a set of rules for the design of the local amino acids interactions to disfavour non-native states. After many iterations, a refolding calculation filters out about 90% of the initial sequences that are found not to have a funnelled energy landscape. The complexity of Baker's procedure demonstrates that is not easy to produce sequences with low frustration.
Here we present a novel protein model where low frustration folding is observed both for natural and designed sequences, the latter obtained without the need of negative design. The novel model is obtained from the optimization of the residue-residue and residue-solvent interaction energy terms under the condition that a large number of sequences designed for 125 test proteins are equal to the corresponding natural sequences. As a result, designed sequences with our model are for several properties comparable to natural ones and fold with a low frustration free energy landscape. We additionally demonstrated that for 15 additional randomly selected proteins, notoriously difficult to fold [39], [40], the natural sequences correctly refolded to their corresponding native structures with a remarkable precision between 2.5 and 5 Å. In other words both quantitative protein design and folding are possible simultaneously. We anticipate that our methodology will have direct application for protein design and structure prediction, but also we expect that it will become a reference point for the development of alternative protein models. For instance, a more or less accurate description can be obtained by adding or removing details from our model, under the condition that the maximum valence principle remains satisfied.
