Introduction
Sustainable management of coastal resources is an important policy goal for all governments of countries with coastlines [1]. This is particularly so in coastal waters adjacent to major population centers, where recreational, conservation and economic uses of the areas often co-exist and compete for space. The latter is particularly vulnerable, as non-market values associated with recreational use (such as recreational fishing or scuba diving) and marine conservation are often high, requiring areas designated for commercial purposes to either be efficiently utilized or given over to the non-commercial activities. Increasingly, marine conservation spatial planning tools are considering the opportunity cost of commercial activities forgone when aiming to achieve conservation objectives [2], and commercial activities that are not operating fully efficiently are most likely to be first displaced. Conversely, where commercial industries are maintained within coastal waters, it is important that management of these industries ensures that they operate at their most productive level.
Ensuring sustainable use of marine resources in coastal waters requires an understanding of drivers of productivity. Productivity analysis is a well established technique in applied economics, and has been applied to a wide variety of industries [3]. In this study, by way of example to illustrate its use in coastal aquaculture, we focus on the potential to enhance productivity in the Sydney rock oyster (Saccostrea glomerata) (SRO) industry in Moreton Bay, Queensland. Much of the area of Moreton Bay is designated as a multiple use marine park, with some areas designated as no-take zones, some for recreational fishing only and others for low-impact commercial fishing and aquaculture. The Bay is adjacent to Brisbane, the capital city of Queensland and the third largest city in Australia. Much of the Brisbane population use the Bay area for recreational purposes, and recreational use value is believed to far exceed the value of commercial activities in the Bay [4], [5].
Oyster farming in Moreton Bay has been particularly challenged over the past decades, with current production well below historic levels. At one point, Moreton Bay was the largest oyster producing region in Australia, supplying the Sydney and Melbourne markets as well as Brisbane [6]. Overfishing, disease and changes in market conditions have all contributed to the decline in the Moreton Bay industry [6]. However, the area available for production (i.e., under commercial leases) and number of farmers is still one of largest of all estuaries along the Australian east coast, yet total production is relatively low in comparison to other areas [7], [8]. Roughly 17 per cent of all Australian SRO lease holders are located in Moreton Bay, yet they produce less than 2 per cent (by value) of Australian SRO production [7].
In response to this declining production and the opportunity cost this creates in terms of alternative activities in the Bay this creates, the Oyster Industry Management Plan for Moreton Bay Marine Park [9] includes the objectives of increasing production from the existing leases, to promote the commercial industry development and to improve the image of the industry. The related policy of non-productive oyster leases [10] includes a provision for minimum production levels in oyster leases and the requirement to “show cause” for non-productive farmers as to why they should retain their lease.
Increasing production from a given set of leases can only occur through increased efficiency and/or capacity utilisation. To determine the extent of any potential production increases, the existence and causes of any inefficiency and/or capacity underutilisation needs to be determined. It is unclear whether the current situation of the SRO industry in Moreton Bay is due to oyster farmers’ business choices, farmers’ personal characteristics or whether environmental conditions in the Moreton Bay limit the capacity of the oyster industry in this region.
Coastal fishery and aquaculture production can be influenced by the condition of coastal waters, which can be affected by human activities that occur along shorelines (e.g., increasing urbanisation, industrial development, and run-off from agriculture) [11]. Furthermore, the personal traits of fishermen (e.g., experience, educational level) can also have an effect on the resourceful operation of coastal fisheries. The understanding of the relationship between production factors (e.g., degree of government regulation, age of labour force, weather, and coastal water quality) and the productive performance of fisheries helps determine the extent and means by which productivity can be enhanced.
In this study, the productivity of the Moreton Bay SRO industry was assessed through measures such as technical efficiency, scale efficiency, allocative efficiency and capacity utilisation. Factors that drive these measures were also examined. These approaches are being increasingly applied in aquaculture as a means of providing information to policy makers on how to improve productivity in these industries [12]. The method was based on a two-stage analysis approach, with productivity measures derived in the first stage using multi-output data envelopment analysis (DEA). In the second stage of the analysis, the influence of oyster farmers’ personal characteristics and environmental conditions at different production sites on the derived efficiency and capacity scores was examined.

Moreton Bay Sydney Rock Oyster Industry
The Sydney rock oyster industry which is one of Australia's oldest industries, dating back to European settlement [13]. This aquaculture industry is located in estuaries on Australia’s east coast ranging from the border between Victoria and New South Wales in the south to Moreton Bay in Queensland in the north (Fig. 1). The industry is based on a native species that naturally occurs in these waters. The SRO industry has been affected by a range of challenges over the past decades, including reoccurring disease outbreaks; the management of food security, biodiversity and environmental degradation risks; severe weather events; and market competition from the increasing production of the introduced Pacific oyster species [14].

The history of the SRO industry in Moreton Bay, the northern most cultivation area at the mouth of the Brisbane River, dates back to European settlement in Australia in the early 1800s [15]. The production of oysters in Moreton Bay peaked in the early 1900s [15], [16]. The decline in oyster production in Moreton Bay at that time was linked to mudworm infestation and severe depletion of natural oyster banks [6], [15], [16]. Since then oystering in Moreton Bay continued to be undertaken on a smaller scale in comparison to a relatively large industry in New South Wales. Currently there are 67 oyster farming businesses that take up a total of 97 approved leases in this estuary. In 2011–12 the total annual production volume of oysters in Moreton Bay was about 132,294 dozen valued at approximately $513,400 Australian Dollars [17]. The major market for SROs from the Moreton Bay is Brisbane, a metropolis with a population of 1.8 million people.
Moreton Bay is one of currently 65 Ramsar sites in Australia (which are unique wetlands that are of particular biological importance) [18] and the Bay is designated as a multiple use marine park. The Oyster Industry Management Plan provides an administrative framework for managing the oyster industry within the marine park. The plan is accredited under Marine Parks Regulations 2006 and oyster growers who conduct their operations within the framework of the plan do not require a marine parks permit.
There are currently four areas allocated for oyster growing in Moreton Bay: Moreton Island (hereafter referred to as Eastern Banks), North Stradbroke Island (includes Myora and Canaipa, hereafter referred to as Eastern Bay), Pimpama River and Pumicestone Passage (Fig. 2).

The oyster areas are located within General Use, Habitat and Conservation zones of the Moreton Bay Marine Park [19]. Both (approved) commercial and recreational fishing activity can occur within oyster areas as long as the activity does not interfere with the aquaculture operation. The total area allocated to oyster leases covers about 435 hectares, which is less than one per cent of the total area of the marine park [19].
The Moreton Bay oyster industry is managed by the Queensland Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (QLD DAFF). Resource allocation authorities issued under the Fisheries Act 1994 provide the holders the exclusive right to cultivate and to take oysters from the designated lease areas. Resource allocation authorities are issued for a period of up to 30 years.
SROs are filter feeding organisms and naturally occur in estuaries where the intertidal change provides a suitable habitat. This native Australian oyster species takes about 2.5 to 3.5 years to grow the smallest and largest marketable size, respectively. SROs are typically harvested in the warmer summer months ranging from October to March.
Being filter feeders, they can accumulate any type of pollution present in the water. The monitoring of the safety of oyster for human consumption includes regular water sampling at oyster areas and oyster meat sampling, with supply of oysters from particular leases stopped should water and meat samples not comply with food safety standards. Run-off from agricultural production in nearby river catchments can carry sediments into the estuary which may negatively affect water quality, oyster growth and also food safety. This is particularly problematic after high rainfall events, which also has the effect of reducing salinity further affecting the health of the oysters. The presence of high E. coli levels in meat samples, caused, for example, by sewage spills, is also observed occasionally, and leads to ceasing the supply of oysters from affected areas.
