Introduction
The AASHO road test was probably the most significant piece of pavement research performed in the 20th century. The results of the AASHO road test have served as the basis for nearly all subsequent pavement designs used in the original construction of the interstate highway system (IHS) after 1961. When considering the overall performance of HIS pavements, we find that most of the pavements have lasted the expected 20 years while carrying traffic volumes far in excess of those predicted at the time of design [1].
The AASHO road test, possibly the largest and most successful controlled civil engineering experiment ever undertaken, was conducted about 50 years ago. The results of the study are still widely used across the world. Significant results from this road test still govern pavement design worldwide, including in areas such as: (a) equivalent single-axle loads (ESALs); (b) the serviceability–performance concept; (c) effects of layer thickness and strength; and (d) effectiveness of dowels and joint spacing. In addition, AASHO road test also changed the way that pavement research is conduct by illustrating the power of factorial experiments, high-quality data, and statistical analysis [2].
The American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) road test at Ottawa, Illinois provided the basis for calculating the required pavement thickness. Models were developed that related pavement performance, vehicle loadings, the strength of roadbed soils, and the pavement structure. Equation 1 is the AASHTO equation used for design purposes. The purpose of the AASHTO model in the pavement thickness design process is to calculate the required structural number (SN). This is the strength of the pavement that must be constructed to carry the mixed vehicle loads over the roadbed soil, while providing satisfactory serviceability during the design period. Knowing the SN, the pavement layer thickness or overlay thickness can be calculated [3].
Vehicle loads are expressed in 18-kip equivalent single axle loads (18-kip ESAL). This information is normally generated by the district planning office.(1)The unknown to be determined is:

SN = Structural number required inches.

The inputs include the variables:

W18 = Accumulated 18-kip ESAL over the life of the project.

ZR = Standard normal deviate.

MR = Resilient modulus psi

The inputs include the constants:

SO = Standard deviation.

ΔPSI = Change in serviceability.

In the strategic highway research program (SHRP) project [4], as the equation was being used for research rather than design, a 50% reliability was selected as appropriate for mean predictions. At 50% reliability ZR = 0, and this term drops out of the equation. Equation 1 was used to predict the total KESALs (1000 ESALs) required to cause the observed losses in PSI.
Resilient moduli for the subgrade (Mr) were estimated based on the procedure provided in the 1986 guide. It should be noted that this procedure does not consider seasonal effects, so the subgrade moduli were not entirely consistent. However, the differences in magnitudes that would have occurred from seasonal adjustments would not have made significant differences to the results. Historical traffic data provided by the State Highway Agencies (SHAs) were used for the traffic data (W) in these calculations. The cumulative KESALs for each section were divided by the number of years since the test section was opened to traffic to obtain average values per year. This allowed extrapolation of an addition one or two year beyond 1989, to estimate a traffic level associated with the date of performance monitoring activities. Most of the monitoring data used were obtained in 1990 or 1991.
Banan and Hjelmstad [5] re-examined the AASHO road-test data, using adaptive random partitioning neural-network model developed by Banan and Hjelmstad (1995), and show that neural network model can represent the data far better than the AASHO formula. They conclude that the neural network may be an appropriate tool for the development of data-based models of pavement performance in the future.
In the report of FHWA-HRT-06-109, Souza et al. [6] presents an analysis between the international roughness index (IRI) and the standard deviation of longitudinal roughness (s), as well as a neural network study developed to predict the critical level of roughness. Using suitable software, the IRI and s values were computed for every longitudinal pavement profile measured. The neural network could forecast the IRI with an extremely high correlation factor (R2 = 0.99).
Ozgan used the artificial neural network method to model the Marshall Stability (MS) of asphalt concrete under varying temperature and exposure times [7]. Alavi et al., derived a high-precision model to predict the flow number of dense asphalt mixtures using a generalized regression neural network and multiple regression-based analyses [8]. Kok and et al., aimed to model the complex modulus of base and styrene–butadiene–styrene (SBS) modified bitumens by using artificial neural networks (ANNs). They used the variants of the Levenberg–Marquardt, scaled conjugate gradient and Pola-Ribiere conjugate gradient algorithms [9]. Wu and et al., studied the computation of the stress intensity factors at the crack tip for pavement crack propagation analysis using a neural network approach based on semi-analytical finite element analysis [10]. Kok and et al., studied to model the complex modulus of styrene–butadiene–styrene modified bitumen samples by different methods using artificial neural networks [11].
The principal goal of this study was to relate the design life of the pavements obtained from the AASHTO equation, which is known worldwide, with the observed life in terms of equivalent single-axle loads.
