Introduction
High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) is a relatively new video compression standard, developed by the Joint Collaborative Team on Video Coding (JCT-VC), from ITU-T VCEG and ISO/IEC MPEG [1]. The main goals of HEVC design include increased video resolutions and the exploitation of parallel processing architectures [2]. HEVC is suited for a variety of applications, such as broadcast of high definition (HD) TV signals over satellite, terrestrial transmission systems and cables, video content acquisition and editing systems, security applications, camcorders, Blue-ray discs, Internet and mobile network video and real-time conversational applications that include video conferencing, video chat, and tele-presence systems [3]. One of the downside, of the ever-growing nature of Internet and multimedia technologies, is the high risk associated with the ease of manipulation, tampering and illegal copying of the digital contents, especially the multimedia. The security of digital contents, therefore, constitutes a quintessential aspect of copyright protection in today's multimedia related industries. For this very reason, the integrity, verification and authentication of digital videos form an active research area today [4]. Of special interest is the field of digital watermarking wherein the owner's/consumer's watermark is digitally embedded in the digital content, for protection against unauthorized copying as well as the ownership declaration and contents authorization [5], [6].
Digital watermarking of HEVC encoded videos may be a difficult task, because the codec eliminates most of the redundancy that the watermarking process may exploit. Casual embedding of a watermark, thus, may escalate the final video file size or otherwise affect the quality of the video; a carefully conceived embedding strategy is thus needed. Keeping these in view, we intend to propose an HEVC watermarking scheme that would have negligible effect on both the video quality and the final file size. Our strategy is to embed a watermark, during the encoding process, that can be completely extractable during the decoding process. Normally, a watermark may either be embedded in the spatial domain or the frequency domain. With spatial domain video watermarking, the hidden data may be lost during the quantization step of the underlying video codec. One solution to this problem is to embed the watermark in such a way that it survives the quantization loss. But this may come at the cost of lower imperceptibility. A better solution is to go for the frequency domain and better embed the watermark after the quantization step, i.e. in the quantized transform coefficients (QTCs). In our approach, we adopt this later approach and embed the watermark message in the selected non-zero QTCs of all the frames of the video.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. For a better comprehension of this article, the first part of Section outlines a brief overview of the state of the art HEVC standard. The second part of the same section provides a brief literature review regarding the watermarking techniques proposed for various video coding standards, in vogue. The proposed watermarking algorithm is outlined in Section 0.2.2, wherein both the embedding and detection processes are described. Section 0.2.2 analyses the experimental results, followed by the concluding remarks in Section 0.2.2.
